Distribution Agreement
In presenting this thesis or dissertation as a partial fulfillment of the
requirements for an advanced degree from Emory University, I
hereby grant to Emory University and its agents the non-exclusive
license to archive, make accessible, and display my thesis or
dissertation in whole or in part in all forms of media, now or
hereafter known, including display on the world wide web. I
understand that I may select some access restrictions as part of the
online submission of this thesis or dissertation. I retain all
ownership rights to the copyright of the thesis or dissertation. I also
retain the right to use in future works (such as articles or books) all
or part of this thesis or dissertation.
Signature:
Marcelitte Failla Date
Black Witch Thought:
An Africana Feminist Religious Movement in 21st
-Century America
By
Marcelitte Failla
Ph.D.
Religion
Dianne Stewart, Ph.D.
Advisor
Axelle Karera, Ph.D.
Committee Member
Gary Laderman, Ph.D.
Committee Member
Margarita Guillory, Ph.D.
Committee Member (Outside Reader)
Accepted:
Kimberly Jacob Arriola, Ph.D.
Dean of the James T. Laney School of Graduate Studies
Date
Black Witch Thought:
An Africana Feminist Religious Movement in 21st
-Century America
By
Marcelitte Failla
B.A., Hunter College, CUNY, 2010
M.F.A., City College of New York, CUNY, 2014
Advisor: Dianne Stewart, Ph.D.
An abstract of a dissertation submitted to the Faculty of the James T. Laney School of Graduate
Studies of Emory University in partial fulfillment of the requirements for the degree of Doctor of
Philosophy in Religion, 2023.
Abstract
Black Witch Thought:
An Africana Feminist Religious Movement in 21st
-Century America
By
Marcelitte Failla
Situated at the crossroads between Black feminist studies and Africana religious studies,
this dissertation engages archival research, digital media content analysis, and ethnography,
especially semi-structured interviews with influential Black witches, to explore their collective
histories and thought worlds. Taking seriously a nomenclature that now defines the spiritual
identity of an increasing number of Black women and femmes across the United States, my
scholarship examines a lineage of Black witches who possess ontological supernatural power(s)
and engage African-heritage religions. The Black witch is everywhere, with a significant
presence on social media, such as @thehoodwitch, who boasts over 470 thousand followers.
TikTok videos with Black witch hashtags, such as #blitch, #blackwitchesoftiktok, and
#blackwitch, have accumulated over 232 million views. Offline, the Black witch gathers at
conferences and kitchen tables in New Orleans, Detroit, Baltimore, and other cities and regions
of the country.
I argue that an Africana religious philosophy firmly rooted in Black feminism—or what I
call a Black feminist Africana religious orientation—is the framework Black witches employ for
their understanding of self, community formation, and beliefs regarding material manifestation.
Based on archival and primary source material, I maintain that Black conjure practitioners in the
mid-19th to early-20th century used the terms ‘witch’ and ‘witchcraft’ to denote a variety of
African-derived spiritual practices, thus challenging widely held beliefs that these terms only
apply to white Neopagan practitioners. I then probe ethnographic accounts of spiritual abilities
such as communicating with the dead and argue that a Black feminist Africana religious
orientation informs a Black witch ontology. “Black Witch Thought” then examines the emerging
movement’s political and intellectual lineages, particularly Black religious nationalism, queer
theory, and Black feminism. Finally, I analyze how Black witches engage material manifestation
narratives often structured through the tenets of prosperity gospel rhetoric and reconceptualize
them based on a theological belief in mutual aid and anti-capitalism. The interventions each
chapter makes crescendo into a scholarly exploration that illumines how spiritual and political
beliefs are inseparable in Black witch thought and serves as a case study of how American
religion is changing in the 21st century.
Black Witch Thought:
An Africana Feminist Religious Movement in 21st
-Century America
By
Marcelitte Failla
B.A., Hunter College, CUNY, 2010
M.F.A., City College of New York, CUNY, 2014
Advisor: Dianne Stewart, Ph.D.
A dissertation submitted to the Faculty of the James T. Laney School of Graduate Studies of
Emory University in partial fulfillment of the requirements for the degree of Doctor of
Philosophy in Religion, 2023.
Acknowledgments
I want to express my deepest gratitude to my advisor, Dr. Dianne Stewart, whose initial
faith in me has profoundly impacted my life. Thank you for the patient conversations, extensive
feedback on my writing, career guidance, letters of recommendation, and unwavering support. I
aspire to carry forward your legacy in the field of Africana Religious Studies.
I am also immensely grateful to Dr. Gary Laderman for consistently believing in the
importance of studying Black witchcraft, encouraging a creative approach to scholarship, and
providing countless letters of recommendation. I sincerely thank Dr. Margarita Guillory for her
invaluable mentorship and for allowing me to publish an article in the Black Scholar. I thank Dr.
Axelle Karera for broadening my perspective beyond the field of religion.
I am indebted to Dr. Yvonne Chireau, whose mentorship and friendship have profoundly
influenced my understanding of Black religion. Thank you, Dr. Chireau, for our enlightening
conversations, for continuously sharing opportunities, for including me in the workshop on
preserving Hoodoo, and for your guidance throughout the academic job market.
Thank you to my editor, Dr. Carrie Kholi-Murchison. Not only did you do an impeccable
job with the grammatical edits, but your commitment to the content helped shape the ideas. You
assisted in clarifying my findings, improving the flow and mood of the writing, and made this
work a joy to read. I could not have finished this dissertation without your support.
I would also like to thank my exam committee: Dr. Kyrah Malika Daniels, Dr. Calvin
Warren, and Dr. Dilek Huseyinzadegan. Your guidance and expertise have been instrumental in
my growth and understanding of queer of color critique, feminisms of color, and Africana
religions.
Thank you to all the faculty and staff at the Mellon/American Council of Learned
Societies for providing the funding that enabled me to bring this project to completion. Your
guidance during the career seminar was invaluable. I would also like to express my gratitude to
Andy Boyles for his consistently prompt and efficient administrative assistance in addressing all
my logistical concerns. Thank you to Dr. María Carrión and James Hoesterey in the Graduate
Division of Religion.
I am incredibly fortunate to have had my friends and colleagues’ support and intellectual
engagement: Elaine Penagos, Christina Désert, Keith Menhinick, Amanda Anderson, and Dr.
Michelle Gordon (who provided me with a wonderful teaching associate opportunity in the
Department of African American Studies). You have been the best companions in academic
conversations and have provided invaluable support throughout this journey.
Thank you to the leaders of Ile Ori African Cultural Center: Iyalosa Omolewa O.
Eniolorunopa, Iyanifa Niniola Emilere, and Iyanifa Ayorinde Awojobi. You taught me aspects of
Ifá that I could not learn from books.
To my mother, Marcelitte senior, the first Black witch I knew, who is why I study
African-heritage religions, and to my father, Robert Failla, I offer my heartfelt thanks. I am
grateful to my New York family—Kirya Traber, Jessie Levandov, Kjerstin Rossi, and Claudia
O’Brien—for their assistance during the initial application process. To my phenomenal
community of loved ones in Atlanta—Marcel Foster, Raphiel Murden, Adrian Spatzer, Adrian
Kunemund, Crystal Serena, Vinisha, and Chris Rumph—I extend my deepest gratitude for the
emotional support that enabled me to complete this degree.
I extend my sincerest appreciation to my husband, Marlon Hendred. Your love,
compassion, presence, and unwavering support have made this journey possible. 
And lastly, I thank my ancestors, Ori and Orisa who are always with me.
Ase!
Table of Contents
Introduction: The Black Witch Movement……………………………………………………….1
Chapter One: Healing, Manifestation, and Justice: African American Witchcraft…………….28
Chapter Two: Defining the Self: An Africana Ontology of Black Feminist Power…………...69
Chapter Three: A Discourse for Us All: Religiopolitical Thought in Community…………...112
Chapter Four: Manifesting Change: Spiritual Co-Creation and Religiopolitical Thought…….156
Conclusion: Charting a New Discourse……………………………………………………………...202
Selected Bibliography………………………………………………………………………………….208
Tables and Figures
Figure 1: Mrs. Davis……………………………………………………………………………..61
Figure 2: Kongo Cosmogram…………………………………………………………………...167
Figure 3: LaReina, Owner of Queenly Conjure…………………………………………….….199
Introduction:
The Black Witch Movement
Mawiyah Kai EL-Jamah Bomani, an eighth-generation witch, Oya priestess in the
Yoruba tradition of Ifá, and expert conjure woman, is pictured in a power pose with her hands on
her hips in an all-black vinyl catsuit with locks cascading down her back.1 Her chin up. Her stare
to the camera. She seems to be daring her audience to make a move. The caption accompanying
the photo reads, “What I wear during the witchiest month of the year.” Across social media, one
can easily witness the presence of Black witches like Mawiyah. They appear on TikTok such as
BossyBruja’s account offering spells to attract love, healing, money, and success, on popular
Instagram accounts like the @thehoodwitch, and at local events like Dawtas of the Moon: Black
Witch Convention.
Books like Lilith Dorsey’s Orishas, Goddesses, and Voodoo Queens (which quickly
became a best-seller among spiritual seekers), YouTube series like Iyalosa Osunyemi
Akalatunde’s on Black witchcraft (which has influenced Black women for over 11 years), and
Facebook group’s like Daizy October Latifah’s The Witches’ Brew: Indigenous Rootwork and
Conjure all contribute to a Black witch discourse that spreads among the larger Black witch
population. This dissertation is an ethnographic and historical study of the contemporary Black
witch and her emerging religious movement.2
It explores core political and theological beliefs
taking shape on and offline, ultimately arguing that Black witches are collectively constructing
what I call a Black feminist Africana religious orientation based on the merging of shared West
1
I have chosen to use the real names of interlocutors because it helps direct readers to their spiritual services, which
produce an income upon which many Black witches depend.
2 Although the term Black witch is not gender-specific, my focus is on Black women and femmes given their
overwhelming presence in the movement and their historical demonization.
2
and West-Central African beliefs (such as reincarnation and ancestor veneration) and a Black
feminist framework. I argue that a Black feminist Africana religious orientation serves as the
philosophical basis for the Black witch’s understanding of self, community formation, and
spiritual discourse around manifestation narratives.
Background
Black witches who practice African-heritage religions typically escape association with
popular representations of witches in the American imagination. The term “witch” is commonly
associated with a lineage of European pagan traditions that mostly white feminists revived in the
late 20th century. White feminists embraced pagan practices and connected the term witch to a
new spiritual movement centered around the Goddess, a dedication to combating gender
inequality at home and work, and environmental activism. Some notable white witches include
Laurie Cabot and her lineage of initiated witches, Starhawk and the Reclaiming Witches, and
Christian Day and Brian Cain, who organize HexFest in New Orleans.
3 European traditions
affiliated with witchcraft include Wicca, Druidry, Celtic neopaganism, and Italian Stregheria.
African-descended individuals can and do practice these European traditions and have even
developed their own spaces, such as the Facebook group African American Wiccans and the
Facebook page The African American Wiccan Society Online School. Starr RavenHawk, a
famous witch of African descent, practices Wicca, organizes WitchFest USA, an annual festival
in New York City, and was trained under the guidance of Laurie Cabot.4 While Starr
3
“Laurie Cabot Official Website.” Accessed June 27, 2023. https://www.lauriecabot.com., Salomonsen, Jone.
Enchanted Feminism: Ritual, Gender and Divinity among the Reclaiming Witches of San Francisco. Religion and
Gender. London ; New York: Routledge, 2002., HexFest. “HexFest 2023: A Weekend of Witchery in Old New
Orleans!” Accessed June 27, 2023. https://www.hexfest.com/index.php?,
4 WitchsFest USA - A Pagan Faire. “WitchsFest USA - A Pagan Faire | A Festival Event for All from the Heart of
New York City through the Magicks of The World Wide Web.” WitchsFest, June 22, 2023.
https://www.witchsfestusa.org.
3
RavenHawk and many members of the Facebook group African American Wiccans identify as
both Black and witches, I have chosen not to focus on this particular group and lineage.
Alternatively, this dissertation explores a separate Africana-oriented movement of Black
women and femmes who are practitioners of African-heritage religions such as Ifá, Hoodoo, and
Vodou and define themselves as Black witches. For many Black witches in what I call
“Africana” lineages, “Black” not only refers to someone of African descent but encompasses
their African-originated religious practices. Choosing the traditions of their ancestral past is a
political decision for these Black witches, as it signifies their commitment to aligning with and
uplifting Blackness. Within the population of Africana-oriented Black witches, this research
examines two main groups. The first group is the broader social media phenomenon of Black
women and femmes choosing to identify as Black witches. The second group is the more
interconnected network of Black witches who engage in more frequent in-person, communal
dialogues, offering support for each other's work.
Although I do not have precise information on the first broader group’s size, it is evident
that the Black witch’s social presence is rapidly expanding. On Instagram, Bri Luna, popularly
known as The HoodWitch ®, has 482,000 followers. The Facebook group, Magically Spiritual
Black Women, has 97,000 members, and Black witch hashtags on TikTok total over 232,000,000
views. Social media, a capitalist enterprise that generates billions of dollars annually, including
Meta (the company behind Facebook, Instagram, and WhatsApp), which reported a total revenue
of $116 billion in 2022, still serves as the predominant marketplace of accessible platforms for
Black women and femmes nationwide to connect.5 Black witches use social media to share
5
“Meta Reports Fourth Quarter and Full Year 2022 Results.” Accessed June 27, 2023.
https://investor.fb.com/investor-news/press-release-details/2023/Meta-Reports-Fourth-Quarter-and-Full-Year-2022-
Results/default.aspx.
4
rituals, offer mentorship, promote their products and services, and express their political beliefs.
Additionally, they employ platforms like GoFundMe to redistribute money to people in need and
organize gatherings through video conferencing platforms such as Zoom.
On social media, most Black witches are novice practitioners of African-heritage
religions. Some are just beginning to explore ontological abilities like communicating with
spirits or healing through energy transfer. In this dissertation, these novice practitioners are
referred to as seekers. Many seekers are leaving the Black church and turning towards Africanheritage religions for personal and political reasons. They pursue a connection with their African
ancestral lineage and are dissatisfied with the conventional structures and cultures of the church,
which often replicate forms of patriarchy and white supremacy. Social media acts as a gateway
for curious seekers, where they encounter expert practitioners like Juju Bae and the HoodWitch.
These experts offer divination services, online classes, and spiritual products, serving as mentors
for aspiring spiritual practitioners. Seekers can either request explicit paid guidance or simply
follow a Black witch account that shares divination and spell tutorials. In Facebook groups, there
are often “#starthere” posts that guide seekers to trusted texts and educate them about the “dos
and don'ts” of Africana spirituality. For example, the Facebook group The Witches Brew:
Indigenous Rootwork and Conjure provides a list of reputable diviners for seekers to contact. On
Instagram, seekers engage with experienced Black witches through discussions in the comments
section or during Instagram Live sessions. Thus, social media serves as a virtual gathering place
for communal learning and praxis among Black witches.
Although some might assume that Black witches on social media are primarily a younger
generation of witches, this vast network is actually intergenerational. Many leading Black
witches on social media—like Shawna, also known as #Oshunslight (@oshunslight), and Karen 
5
Rose (@empresskarenmrose), who owns Sacred Vibes Apothecary (@sacredvibesapothecary) in
New York City—are in their 50s, given the time required to become a skilled Black witch –
which includes extensive years of mentorship, initiation into a religious tradition, and the time
needed to develop a reputation within broader Black witch networks.
Most of my ethnographic research consisted of engaging with the second group of
witches named above—a communal network of skilled, respected, and leading Black witches
engaging in localized work, that then influences practitioners across the United States.6
I spoke
with 30 Black witches that participate in a network much more interwoven than the broader
population of witches on social media. I chose to interview people actively contributing to Black
witch discourse through the publication of books on Africana religions, dissemination of
information through large online platforms with in-person engagement options (often at brickand-mortar retail locations), and/or provision of spiritual services.
Like the broader digital group of Black witches, the network of women interviewed for
this project is also intergenerational, including younger Black witches like LaReina Besant
(owner of Queenly Conjure in Louisiana), as well as more established Black witches like Iyalosa
Osunyemi Akalatunde in Florida. Almost all of them are spiritual service providers, meaning
they offer their skills in divination, spell work, or mentorship to people needing spiritual
guidance or intervention. Most are college-educated; many of them have master’s degrees and
maintain an objectively middle-class income. Some hold other forms of employment alongside
their spiritual work – ranging from teaching, to burlesque dancing, to insurance claims
evaluation – while others live solely on income generated from client services.
6
“Black Witch Thought” focuses on the beliefs and practices of Black witches living in the United States due to
specific histories of African American cultural and religious development in the United States and the ways in which
this history informs the practice of African-heritage religions.
6
As opposed to the vast but loosely connected digital Black witch networks, communitybased witches tend to be regionally situated. For instance, in Detroit, Michigan, Yvette Wyatt
owns the spiritual supply shop, Motown Witch; hosts the annual Detroit Hoodoo Festival; and
holds monthly Black witch meetings called Real Black Witches of Detroit. The Detroit
community includes other influential Black witches such as Ifa Abeyo, a Lucumí initiate and
Hoodoo practitioner, and Doctor Beverly, a renowned rootworker.
Baltimore, Maryland, also has a sizeable Black witch community. Each year Omitola
Yejide Ogunsina, a priestess of Yemoja in the Ifá tradition, coordinates the Dawtas of the Moon
Black Witch Convention, where participants share skills in tarot reading, hexing for justice, or
spells to navigate mental health concerns such as depression. There are also reoccurring local
and regional presenters at Dawtas of the Moon, including the Osun priestess Iyalosa Osundara, a
mentee of Omitola Yejide Ogunsina, and the sorceress Ada Lola Dixon. Baltimore is also home
to Sam, or Juju Bae, a popular content creator who runs A Little Juju podcast, and poet and
conjure person Hess Love, who co-founded The Chesapeake Conjure Society, a Hoodoo-focused
social justice organization. Although Black witch communities like those in Baltimore and
Detroit are mostly regionally based, social media does help to interweave and extend networks,
bridging the digital community with real life. Most Black witches within the smaller network
attend one another’s events, promote and collaborate on books, rituals, and gatherings, and
engage in dialogue online and offline. Through their continued engagement with one another,
Black witches develop a discourse informed by a long lineage of Black religious thought and
Black feminisms. 
7
Methodological Considerations and Interventions
Because “Black Witch Thought” focuses on practitioners of African-heritage religions,
gathering data for the project necessitates a transdisciplinary approach. As religious studies
scholars Dianne Stewart and Tracey Hucks argue, the study of African-heritage religions
requires what they identify as a transdisciplinary method, one that “transgresses all relevant
disciplinary boundaries to interlace varied tools, methods, frameworks, and datasets in pursuit of
a research problem.”7 They distinguish a transdisciplinary approach from interdisciplinarity,
writing that, “Inter/multidisciplinary scholarship leans toward transdisciplinarity but does not
necessarily proceed from problem-driven inquiries that demand consolidated research methods in
the pursuit of comprehensive proposals.”8
In other words, a transdisciplinary approach uses
available tools to address an area of inquiry, and is derived from the research question itself.
Remaining within traditional disciplinary boundaries excludes methods that could possibly
contribute to effectively and comprehensively addressing the research inquiry.
The questions driving my research are, who is the Black witch, and what is the Black
witch movement’s spiritual and political lineage? To address these questions, I initially
commenced by speaking with Black witches, whom I quickly realized are practitioners of
African-heritage religions alongside their identifications as Black witches. I then proceeded to
conduct research in my home discipline of religion and engaged secondary historical and
anthropological sources providing crucial context for the belief and practices of Africana
religions both on the continent and in the diaspora. My interviewees, however, are also Black
women and femmes living in the United States who are informed by political lineages of Black
7 Dianne Stewart Diakité and Tracey Hucks, “Africana Religious Studies: Toward a Transdisciplinary Agenda in an
Emerging Field,” Journal of Africana Religions 1, no. 1 (January 1, 2013): 28–77. 39.
8
Ibid.
8
radical thought and resistance. Thus, to properly historicize their beliefs and experiences, I
examined work on Black nationalism, particularly Black religious nationalism. From there, it
became clear that Black witches’ significant departures from traditional iterations of Black
religious nationalism are largely due to their queer and Black feminist leanings that critique the
misogynoir, homophobia, and transphobia prevalent in the mid- to late 20th century radical
thought. Like other Black women and femmes of the 21st century, they are informed by Black
feminist and womanist movements that took shape in the 1980s. Identifying Black witches’
religiopolitical leanings demanded engagement with Black feminisms and Black feminist
theoretical lineages.
My research required attention to a wide variety of traditions – particularly religious
ones. It was clear that focusing exclusively on one religious tradition would mean missing the
broader Africana religious landscape, as Black witches are often practitioners of many religions.
An exclusive focus on witchcraft or the witch would eclipse the African and Black orientation
crucial to Black witches’ sense of self, ritual, and faith. I did, however, choose to embrace the
language of the witch due to the extensive occurrence of Black women and femmes choosing the
term Black witch to define themselves and from my desire to begin at the site of self. This
dissertation distinguishes between categories of religion and the witch. Religion is structures,
protocols, and intercommunal hierarchies developed over time to connect with the divine and
form community. Alternatively, the witch is an ontological identity associated with innate powers
existing regardless of affiliation with a religious tradition.
The scholarship on two of the most widely practiced religions of Black witches - Ifá and
Hoodoo – largely focuses on the religions themselves—with precise attention to history,
cosmology, or ritual practice—versus ethnographic studies of practitioners. Religious studies 
9
scholars, including Katrina Hazzard-Donald and Yvonne Chireau, have done significant work
documenting African American Hoodoo’s history, tracing its development into the early 20th
century.9 Other scholars, such as Jason Young and Ras Michael Brown, contributed critical
studies on Hoodoo’s specialized practices and beliefs, including Brown’s examination of Simbi
spirits and Young’s treatment of ritual objects like the nkisi.
10 Kimbwandènde Kia Bunseki FuKiau, Robert Farris Thomson, and Wyatt MacGaffey have also contributed significant research
to the study of Hoodoo by documenting its continental cosmological roots in the pre-colonial
kingdom of the Kongo.11 Moreover, the study of African American Hoodoo would be lacking
without the research of early 20th
-century contributors, including Zora Neale Hurston, Harry
Middleton Hyatt, and Newbell Niles Puckett.12 Lastly, practitioners like Tayannah Lee Mcquillar
and Stephanie Rose Bird have helped elevate Hoodoo rituals to become accessible to broader
Black American spiritual seekers.
13
9 Katrina Hazzard-Donald, Mojo Workin’: The Old African American Hoodoo System (Urbana, IL: University of
Illinois Press, 2013); Yvonne Chireau, Black Magic: Religion and the African American Conjuring Tradition
(Berkeley, CA: University of California Press, 2006).
10 Jason R Young, Rituals of Resistance: African Atlantic Religion in Kongo and the Lowcountry South in the Era of
Slavery (Baton Rouge: Louisiana State University Press, 2011); Ras Michael Brown, African-Atlantic Cultures and
the South Carolina Lowcountry (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2014).
11 Kimbwandènde Kia Bunseki Fu-Kiau, African Cosmology of the Bântu-Kôngo: Tying the Spiritual Knot:
Principles of Life & Living, 2nd ed (Brooklyn, N.Y: Athelia Henrietta Press, pub. in the name of Orunmila, 2001);
Robert Farris Thompson, Flash of the Spirit: African and Afro-American Art and Philosophy, 1st Vintage Books ed
(New York: Vintage Books, 1984); Wyatt MacGaffey, Religion and Society in Central Africa: The BaKongo of
Lower Zaire (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1986).
12 Zora Neale Hurston, Mules and Men, 1. Harper Perennial Modern Classics ed, Harper Perennial Modern Classics
(New York, NY: Harper Perennial, 2008); Zora Hurston, “Hoodoo in America,” The Journal of American Folklore
44, no. 174 (1931): 317–417, https://doi.org/10.2307/535394; Newbell Niles Puckett, Folk Beliefs of the Southern
Negro (Place of publication not identified: Kessinger Pub; 2003); Harry Middleton Hyatt, Hoodoo - Conjuration -
Witchcraft - Rootwork, Beliefs Accepted By Many Negroes and White Persons These Being Orally Recorded Among
Blacks and Whites, 5 vols., Memoirs of the Alma Egan Hyatt Foundation (Hannibal, MO: Western Publishing,
1970).
13 Tayannah Lee McQuillar, Rootwork: Using the Folk Magick of Black America for Love, Money, and Success
(New York: Simon & Schuster, 2003); Tayannah Lee McQuillar, The Hoodoo Tarot: 78-Card Deck and Book for
Rootworkers (Rochester, Vermont: Destiny Books, 2020); Stephanie Rose Bird, 365 Days of Hoodoo: Daily
Rootwork, Mojo, & Conjuration, First Edition (Woodbury, Minnesota: Llewellyn Publications, 2018); Stephanie
Rose Bird, Sticks, Stones, Roots & Bones: Hoodoo, Mojo & Conjuring with Herbs, 1st ed (St. Paul, Minn: Llewellyn
Publications, 2004).
10
Building on Hoodoo scholars’ and practitioners’ contributions, this dissertation
defines Hoodoo as a religion, and distances the religion of Hoodoo from its reification in popular
culture as a loosely agreed upon set of spiritual practices often labeled as magic. It expands on
Katrina-Hazzard Donald’s claim that Black Belt Hoodoo became a solidified religion in the late
18th – early 19th century and Yvonne Chireau’s argument that African Americans in the early 20th
century did not distinguish between categories of magic and religion.14 In the mid-20th century,
after mass commercialization and exploitation by charlatans not in the tradition, African
Americans largely turned away from Hoodoo, at least in the public sphere. In the last decade,
however, African Americans are increasingly interested in the Hoodoo religion, and Black
witches are leading Hoodoo’s resurgence. The Hoodoo practitioners in this study understand the
tradition as their religion, with agreed-upon divination tools, hierarchy systems, and ritual
protocols. “Black Witch Thought” contributes to Hoodoo’s growth by identifying the religion’s
core theological tenets and documenting how Black witch Hoodoo practitioners remember,
define, and redefine Hoodoo in the 21st century.
Most Black witches interviewed for this dissertation are also practitioners of Ifá/Orisa
traditions. Similar to previous studies of Hoodoo, scholars have examined Yoruba-originated Ifá
and its various diasporic iterations, including Lucumí and Candomblé through a focus on one
tradition. E Bolaji Idowu, Wande Abimbola, and Jacob K. Olupona have all contributed crucial
studies on continental Nigerian Ifá.15 These African authors’ works are widely used by African
14 See Katrina Hazzard-Donald, Mojo Workin’: The Old African American Hoodoo System (Urbana, IL: University
of Illinois Press, 2013); Yvonne Chireau, Black Magic: Religion and the African American Conjuring Tradition
(Berkeley, CA: University of California Press, 2006). See also Yvonne Chireau, “Video: Black Magic Matters:
Hoodoo as Ancestral Religion,” accessed April 4, 2023, https://cswr.hds.harvard.edu/news/magicmatters/2021/11/10.
15 Bọlaji Idowu, Olodumare: God in Yoruba Belief (A & B Book Dist Inc, 1994); Ifa: ‘Wande Abimbola, Ifá: An
Exposition of Ifá Literary Corpus, Repr. d. Ausg. Lagos 1976 (Brooklyn, NY: Athelia Henrietta Pr, 1997); ‘Wande
Abimbola and Ivor L. Miller, Ifá Will Mend Our Broken World: Thoughts on Yoruba Religion and Culture in Africa
and the Diaspora, 2. print (Roxbury: Aim Books, 2003); Jacob Obafẹmi Kẹhinde Olupọna, ed., African Spirituality: 
11
American practitioners, including many Black witches of the Isese Ifá religion—or those seeking
to practice African continental iterations versus diasporic traditions like Lucumí or Candomblé.
Previous diasporic studies of Ifá/Orisa include N. Fadeke Castor and Dianne Stewart’s work on
Orisa traditions in Trinidad, Rachel Harding’s study of alternative spaces of freedom in
Candomblé, and Elizabeth Pérez’s ethnographic research on Lucumí practices in a North
American community of African American devotees.16 There have been fewer studies of African
American Ifá, with the most comprehensive being Tracey Hucks’s Yoruba Traditions and
African American Religious Nationalism.
17 These studies of African-heritage religious traditions
were essential in understanding the Black witch’s relationship with religion and in framing her
Africana religious orientation, but the Black witch’s sense of self, or ontological power, which
extends beyond the category of religion, still needed attention.
The category of the witch is helpful for identifying her innate power as well as naming
the feminist politicization associated with the identity. Previous studies of the witch and
witchcraft, however, have focused on European-derived traditions, including scholarship on the
online presence of Wiccan witches since the 1990s and popular books like Witches, Sluts
Feminists by Kristen J. Sollee.18 In 2002 Jone Salomonsen published her ethnographic study of
Forms, Meanings, and Expressions, World Spirituality, v. 3 (New York: Crossroad, 2000)., Jacob K. Olupona, City
of 201 Gods: Ilé-Ifè in Time, Space, and the Imagination (Berkeley: University of California Press, 2011).
16 N. Fadeke Castor, Spiritual Citizenship: Transnational Pathways from Black Power to IFÁ in Trinidad (Durham:
Duke University Press, 2017); Dianne M. Stewart, Obeah, Orisa, and Religious Identity in Trinidad: Africana
Nations and the Power of Black Sacred Imagination. Volume II: Orisa, Religious Cultures of African and African
Diaspora People (Durham: Duke University Press, 2022); Rachel E. Harding, A Refuge in Thunder: Candomblé and
Alternative Spaces of Blackness, Blacks in the Diaspora (Bloomington, Ind: Indiana University Press, 2003);
Elizabeth Pérez, Religion in the Kitchen: Cooking, Talking, and the Making of Black Atlantic Traditions, North
American Religions (New York: New York University Press, 2016).
17 Tracey E. Hucks, Yoruba Traditions & African American Religious Nationalism, Religions of the Americas Series
(Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press, 2014).
18 Chris Miller, “How Modern Witches Enchant TikTok: Intersections of Digital, Consumer, and Material Culture(s)
on #WitchTok,” Religions 13, no. 2 (February 2022): 118, https://doi.org/10.3390/rel13020118; Venetia Robertson,
“Deus Ex Machina? Witchcraft and the Techno-World,” Literature & Aesthetics 19, no. 2 (2009),
https://openjournals.library.sydney.edu.au/index.php/LA/article/view/5015.
12
neopagan feminist witches in San Francisco—a vital study in naming a moment when white
women like Starhawk reclaimed the term witch and interwove it with their beliefs in
environmental sustainability, the mother goddess, and women’s rights.19 Although studies of
European-derived witchcraft are essential for considering an ontological status of innate power
and analyzing how feminism integrates with broader spiritual movements, they cannot fully
account for a Black witch identity, as most are practitioners of African-heritage religions and
thus construct, what I argue, is an Africana religious orientation.
Scholarship that focuses less on a religious tradition, and more on broader Africana
spirituality where various religions intersect, include Stephanie Mitchem’s African American
Folk Healing, Akasha Gloria Hull’s Soul Talk: The New Spirituality of African American
Women, and more recently, LeRhonda S. Manigault Bryant’s Talking to the Dead: Religion,
Music, and Lived Memory among Gullah/Geechee Women.
20 Although these books help provide
a model for discussing African American women’s spirituality, an examination of the current
religiopolitical leanings of Black women and femmes today has yet to be written, especially in an
era of social media and in a moment when African-heritage religions are increasingly practiced.
Transdisciplinarity, as well as multi-religious examinations are, thus, crucial for this study.
Focusing on one religion or one political lineage proved insufficient as most Black American
practitioners are being informed by multiple streams of religious, spiritual, and political thought.
Gregory Grieve, “Imagining a Virtual Religious Community: Neo-Pagans on The Internet,” Chicago Anthropology
Exchange 7 (1995); Kristen J. Sollée and Coz Conover, Witches, Sluts, Feminists: Conjuring the Sex Positive
(Berkeley: ThreeL Media, 2017).
19 Jone Salomonsen, Enchanted Feminism: Ritual, Gender and Divinity among the Reclaiming Witches of San
Francisco, Religion and Gender (London ; New York: Routledge, 2002).
20 Stephanie Y. Mitchem, African American Folk Healing (New York: New York University Press, 2007); Gloria T.
Hull, Soul Talk: The New Spirituality of African American Women (Rochester, Vt: Inner Traditions, 2001);
LeRhonda S. Manigault-Bryant, Talking to the Dead: Religion, Music, and Lived Memory among Gullah-Geechee
Women (Durham; London: Duke University Press, 2014).
13
Likewise, a singular emphasis on the witch, neglects the Blackness so central to Black witch
identity. The Black witch is inseparably, historically and culturally, Black and witch.
An appropriate formalized methodology beyond transdisciplinarity is yet undefined for
Africana Religious Studies, due to decades of scholars of African-heritage religions exclusion
from the field of religion. To legitimize African-heritage beliefs as ‘religion,’ and therefore
worthy of study, scholars have remained within disciplinary boundaries to be taken serious
within various fields. Now as the area of African Religious Studies expands, scholars can and are
experimenting with methodological approaches that account for the phenomenon of religious
practice and its theology by including more ethnographic and oral histories in addition to
traditional archival and conceptual research. Scholars of Africana Religious Studies are
especially paying attention to what David Hall (among others) refers to as lived religion or the
quotidian beliefs, practices, and stories that contribute to shaping a given religion outside of
doctrine and official procedures.21 Hall emphasizes that “…while we know a great deal about the
history of theology and (say) church and state, we know next-to-nothing about religion as
practiced and precious little about the everyday thinking and doing of lay men and women.”22 An
exclusive focus on doctrine is especially insufficient in the study of African-heritage religions.
For example, the Harry Middleton Hyatt collection of 1600 interviews of African Americans
from the US South amassed in the 1930s and 40s is a vital resource for scholars studying
Hoodoo. However, in my conversation with Sen Elias, owner of Crescent City Conjure in New
Orleans, he mentioned that the Hyatt collection offers the protocols and materials needed in
Hoodoo but does not reflect the theology and ritual proceedings crucial to the religion’s
21 David Hall, Lived Religion in America: Toward a History of Practice (Princeton University Press, 1997),
https://doi.org/10.2307/j.ctv143mdcw. Introduction.
22 Ibid., vii.
14
philosophy. Therefore, in this study, ethnography is a critical methodology not only because of
the Black witch movement’s emerging nature but as a tool to understand its lived religious
practice.
As Orisa/Ifá -based traditions were some of the most prominent belief systems among my
interlocutors, I spent extensive periods of time in Ifá communities both as a scholar and a
practitioner. In 2018, I was introduced to Ile Ori African Cultural Center in Atlanta, Ga. Ile Ori
was launched over 25 years ago as the first Isese ile in Atlanta, Georgia. The ile is led by three
women—Iyalosa Omolewa O. Eniolorunopa, her sister Iyanifa Niniola Emilere, and Iyanifa
Niniola’s daughter Iyanifa Ayorinde Awojobi. I began by taking classes with Iyalosa Omolewa
at her house in Atlanta, Georgia, learning basic Yoruba phrases, proper greetings to the elders,
and more about the orisa deities and cosmology.
When Iyalosa Omolewa felt I was ready, I began participating in Ile Ori’s monthly
gatherings that are open to the public, where I quickly realized that no matter how much I read in
books, I would never fully be able to learn about Ifá without emersion into the lived religious
practice. At Ile Ori’s gatherings, I began embodying the religion by learning the dances for each
orisa, saying Yoruba phrases, performing the gestured greetings, and respecting the hierarchy of
elders. Many months were spent preparing the space before service, making food in their
kitchen, serving the elders, and then cleaning up after events, alongside the everyday
conversations that all contributed to establishing trust.
In 2019, I became an official member through a ceremony. As a member, I could attend
other ritual events, such as the three-day Odun Ifá ritual, where offerings are made to Orunmila,
the deity of divination, and forecasts are predicted for the upcoming year. It is an elaborate ritual
during which members work until late in the night, sacrifice, clean, and cook ebo (offerings), 
15
including chickens, goats, and pigeons and conduct divination. Although “Black Witch Thought”
is not a direct study of Ile Ori African Cultural Center, the time I spent learning about Ifá as a
practitioner of Africana religions greatly informed my scholarship on Black witches for this
dissertation.
To further understand diasporic iterations of Black witches’ Africana religious practices,
I also spent time in Salvador Bahia, Brazil, to learn more about Candomblé. I attended a curated
trip led by African Pilgrimages Inc. and Dr. Rachel E. Harding entitled “Traveling the Ancestral
Road,” a spiritual sojourn to Salvador, Bahia, Brazil. We spent about two weeks traveling
throughout Bahia and attending various Candomblé temples known as terreiros. In Salvador
Bahia, for example, I attended a ceremony in honor of the Orixá Ayrá at the Ilê Axé Iya Nasso
Oká temple, popularly known as Casa Branca. Casa Branca is Brazil’s oldest, continually
recognized Candomblé community, which follows the Yoruba tradition. The ceremony began
with about five women of all ages, dressed in long white elaborate dresses reminiscent of the
Portuguese colonial empire, circling the massive altar and honorary chairs at the center of the
room. With solemn faces, they danced to the drums that summoned the Orixá. One by one, eyes
fluttered closed, shoulders moved up and down, and the older woman who had difficulty walking
around the altar before the ceremony got underway was dancing vigorously in front of the drums
for over 30 minutes without a break. The Orixá had arrived.
It was through attending ceremonies that I began seeing the Africana religious
commonalities across the diaspora. Similar ceremonies took place at Ile Ori African Cultural
Center and other Black witch ritual spaces I attended across the US. Even in Bahia, some
terreiros were informed by the Yoruba tradition, where the Orixá dominated, and in others,
Vodun traditions brought by the Dahomean or Jeje nation were prominent. Vodun-influenced 
16
terreiros shared Africana religious practices and beliefs with the Yoruba-informed terreiros.
Shared religious characteristics exemplify a feature of blending customs across religions and
regions, which I later learned was commonplace between modern-day Benin and Nigeria before
colonialism.23 These observations in the diaspora greatly informed my ideas pertaining to
religious blending and multi-religiosity, a core theme in my theorization of a Black feminist
Africana religious orientation. Although Black witches are in the United States and are shaped
by American Black religious formations, they are also children of a wider African diaspora
sharing similar Africana religious characteristics with other African-descended devotees of
African-heritage religions.
In the spring of 2021, after IRB approval, I officially began my ethnographic research on
Black witches. By this time, most people had received the first COVID-19 vaccination, and
masked travel was in effect. My first visit was to the Detroit Hoodoo Festival in Detroit,
Michigan, led by Yvette Wyatt, who owns the Africana-inspired spiritual supply shop the
Motown Witch. While in Michigan, I visited Yvette’s store, where she was hosting a pre-festival
gathering. Here I met more Black witches and Hoodoo and Vodou practitioners, including the
late Hougan (Vodou priest) Papa Hoodoo Sen Moise. Like my participation in Ile Ori African
Cultural Center’s events, my time at the Motown Witch entailed what Jafari Allen calls ‘deep
hanging out.’ ‘Deep hanging out’ is an ethnographic approach where one is not necessarily
discussing the topic of study but building the connections necessary to establish trust. It is based
on Allen’s research in Cuba, where he spent over four years visiting sites such as parties of gay
men, HIV/AIDs organizations, lesbian performance spaces, and black consciousness networks.24
23 Dana Rush, Vodun in Coastal Bénin: Unfinished, Open-Ended, Global (Nashville: Vanderbilt University Press,
2013).
24 Allen, Jafari S. ¡Venceremos?: The Erotics of Black Self-Making in Cuba. Durham: Duke University Press, 2011.
7.
17
For my research, it meant eating, drinking, and spending time with people at the Motown Witch
outside the limits of traditional scholarship.
During the festival, I attended talks and met with Black witches, including Ifa Abeyo, a
Lucumí initiate and Hoodoo practitioner, and Mary Byrd, who practices Egyptian witchcraft. I
also paid close attention to the types of questions participants asked facilitators and the
conversations that occurred after the workshop, which provided insight into the major concerns
of Black witch communities. For example, as Mary Byrd gave a workshop on witchcraft to heal
depression, the conversation quickly turned to how to “tap in” to spiritual powers such as an
ability to communicate with the dead. And in Ifa Abeyo’s workshop on Hoodoo, participants
were hungry for ritual procedures on how to attract love, money, and success. My observations
informed Chapter Two on ontological powers and Chapter Four on manifestation.
Later in my study, I spent time in New Orleans, Louisiana - an essential stop - as the city
is rich in a long history of Hoodoo and Voodoo traditions, the most famous practitioner being
Marie Laveau, a midwife, herbalist, and practitioner of Voodoo who held public ceremonies in
the late 19th century.25 Because of its history, New Orleans is home to many Black witches who
were either born into Hoodoo/Voodoo traditions, or migrated as part of a spiritual calling. A few
Black witches shared that they believe New Orleans has such a ‘strong spiritual pull’ because it
is not a transient city such as Atlanta, New York, or San Francisco. Families have remained there
for generations making those that passed, or the ancestors, a much stronger and more rooted
presence. The dead remain.
25 Martha Ward, Voodoo Queen: The Spirited Lives of Marie Laveau (Jackson: University Press of Mississippi,
2004).
18
In New Orleans, I had the opportunity to speak with renowned practitioner Lilith Dorsey.
Lilith is an initiate of Haitian Vodou and Lucumí, leads a Voodoo Temple in New Orleans, has
been professionally practicing magic for over 32 years, and has written extensively on Africanheritage religions. At her home, we spoke about her entry into African-heritage religions as well
as current practices, beliefs, and trends in Africana religious communities. Coincidently, at the
time of my visit, she had three mentees who were also in New Orleans to undergo initiation into
the tradition. Following the initiation ceremony, Lilith held a gathering to celebrate their new
membership into the religion and generously invited me to the after-ritual celebration. Because I
approach my research as a practitioner/scholar, I knew to bring my whites (traditional clothing
attire for Africana religious rituals). I also knew the types of offerings to bring.
In Lilith’s living room, I sat with a few recent Voodoo initiates, including Black witch
Rebeca Spirit, whom I also later interviewed. Rebeca and Lilith traverse various spiritual and
religious communities, including Wiccan and European-based Neopagan networks, such as the
annual gathering Witchfest. As Rebeca and Lilith discussed the leading figures of Wiccan
movements, such as Starr RavenHawk and the NeoPagan shop Enchantments in New York City,
a distinction between the terms “Black witch” and “witch” emerged. In contrast, Black witch
refers to primarily Black women and femmes who are practitioners of African-heritage religions
and maintain an Africana religious orientation. This distinction remains a crucial observation, as
there are leaders—like Starr RavenHawk, who is both Black and a witch—that do not fit within
the framework and current movement of Black women and femmes reclaiming an Africana
religious orientation; theirs is Wiccan and/or Neopagan. I drew conclusions about the differences
between witch communities through a process of vulnerability, which involved sharing my
journey of identifying as a Black witch and a woman of power during deep hanging out. 
19
I used emic practitioner and scholar methods throughout my study, like in my interview
with Rebeca Spirt, and while attending a Juneteenth festival at Crescent City Conjure. In Lilith’s
living room, I spoke with Rebecca about the importance of elevating the ancestors, a reoccurring
theme that emerged in previous interviews. After being asked, she revealed, “two things are
happening, your people are coming through, and so are mine.” In other words, my grandmother
and Rebeca’s ancestors were with us in the room.
As a scholar, it was not enough to sit and take notes, nor could I bracket beliefs and
intellectualize my deceased grandmother’s presence. I had to believe. I had to be present. A few
days later, at the Juneteenth celebration, on a hot corner outside the Hoodoo and Witchcraft
supply shop Crescent City Conjure, fully participating in the event meant receiving a tarot
reading. After my reading, I asked the (Black) woman if she identified as a Black witch, to which
she shared that she identifies as both a Christian and a witch. My conversation with the tarot
reader led to further distinctions between various witch communities that might not have
occurred had I not been open to receiving a tarot reading and fully engaged in the vulnerability it
requires.
My approach also frames a Black feminist epistemology as a method. Patricia Hill
Collins identifies a Black feminist epistemology by the following criteria: lived experience as a
criterion of meaning, the use of dialogue, an ethic of caring that values empathy, vulnerability,
and demonstrations of genuine investment in positive outcomes for Black women, and an ethic
of personal accountability where people are expected to be accountable to their knowledge
claims.26 Collins concludes that “To be credible in the eyes of this group [other Black women],
Black feminist intellectuals must be personal advocates for their material, be accountable for the
26 Patricia Hill Collins, Black Feminist Thought: Knowledge, Consciousness, and the Politics of Empowerment, 2nd
ed., Routledge Classics (New York: Routledge, 2009). 269-290.
20
consequences of the work, have lived or experienced their material in some fashion, and be
willing to engage in dialogues about their findings with ordinary, everyday people.”27 As a Black
feminist intellectual, I adopted Collins’s criteria and applied them throughout my research
process. For example, the use of dialogue was important not only as a methodological
component of ethnography in the form of semi-structured interviews, but also in establishing
truth claims. Collins notes that within a Black feminist epistemology, truth claims must be
validated by the communities being discussed.
When I began my research, before conversing with Black witches, I held two hypotheses
based on relevant texts in the field. My first hypothesis was that Black witches blended multiple
religious and spiritual traditions, such as tarot, Ifá, Hoodoo, Vodou, and astrology. It appeared as
such based on preliminary observations on social media and scholarly works on Africana folk
religion that claimed blending is common.28 But while in conversation with Black witches, I
learned that many heavily advised against blending traditions. To illustrate, tarot, a divination
tool and spiritual technology originating in 15th century Milan, would not be used to
communicate with the Ifá Powers or orisa. Instead, the Ikin or Opele would be employed. In this
dissertation, spiritual technologies are defined as the methods and tools practitioners employ to
(1) establish connections with divine energies, including deities and ancestors, (2) manipulate
material outcomes, and (3) gain foresight into the future. Examples of such spiritual technologies
encompass divination practices like tarot and scrying, the use of mojo bags to influence specific
events, and religious initiation protocols. Black witches’ reasoning for advising against blending
traditions was due to a long history of white people appropriating and mixing beliefs, practices,
27 Ibid., 285.
28 Stephanie Y. Mitchem, African American Folk Healing (New York: New York University Press, 2007). 70.
21
and deities without much respect for their indigenous cosmologies or philosophies. More
experienced Black witches also advised against blending to protect novice practitioners who
might make costly spiritual mistakes, eventually harming themselves or others. In Black witch
spaces, however, I would still encounter various religious practices and beliefs and, after
extensive dialogue, I realized that theirs was instead a multi-religious practice. Spiritual
technologies that had been developed over centuries within a religious tradition, like the Ikin,
were respected within an Ifá lineage, and deities who shared similar characteristics, like the orisa
Osun and the Lwa Ezili Freda of the Vodou Powers, were respected as distinct deities with
distinct characteristics. Most Black witches were active and often initiated into multiple religious
traditions, practicing each according to its established protocol.
The second hypothesis that required revisiting after discussing my truth claims with other
Black witches concerned manifestation. Most practitioner, or how-to, books on Africana
religions lead one to believe that African-heritage traditions are exclusively about materializing
one’s desired results—an unsurprising generalization as capitalism promotes material
consumption. I initially wrote an entire chapter on material manifestation in Africana religions
and began by exclusively asking my interlocutors about their beliefs in spiritual efficacy.
Repeatedly, however, the conversation steered elsewhere, such as toward healing, ancestor
veneration, their innate abilities, and the importance of initiation. My flexibility, commitment to
my truth claims being validated in the community, and desire for my work to truly be useful to
Black witches, led to my discarding this chapter and developing new research questions.
Material manifestation is still an essential part of “Black Witch Thought”—as discussed in
Chapter Four—because materializing one’s desired world for Black women and femmes in the 
22
afterlife of slavery is very much a Black feminist priority. It does not, however, consume the
focus of this work.
Lastly, my methodology was informed by Anima Adjepong’s notion of interpretive
reflexivity. In their research on a Ghanaian community in Houston, Texas, Adjepong observes
the homophobia and transphobia embedded in the community when members expressed disdain
for Adjepong’s transmasculine gender expression. Adjepong concludes that these interactions
“… reveal the ways in which embodied ways of being simultaneously challenge and lend a depth
of insight to how spaces are organized and ethnography is conducted. My embodiment opened
me up to certain experiences that others may not have had.”29 In my research, I employed
interpretive reflexivity in notions of Blackness. As a Black woman of mixed-race ancestry (my
mother is African American and my father is white Sicilian) with phenotypically European
features, I knew it was important that I acknowledge the privilege I receive from my proximity to
whiteness, as well as the fact that my experiences as a Black woman are different from those
with darker skin, and more phenotypically African features. Colorism/phenotypic stratification is
real and is an oppressive force that harms those with dark skin and stereotypic African
phenotype.30 Although I am often white-assumed, I still very much identify with my African
ancestry - a lineage that guides this work - and while beginning the research process, I hoped that
my interlocutors would also see the complexities of my identity. And they did. For example, in a
conversation with Toya Smith, a conjure woman very dedicated to ensuring African-heritage
religions stay Black, she affirmed that she understands the complexities of Black mixed-race
29 Anima Adjepong, “Invading Ethnography: A Queer of Color Reflexive Practice,” Ethnography 20, no. 1 (March
1, 2019): 27–46, https://doi.org/10.1177/1466138117741502. 15.
30 Dianne M. Stewart, Black Women, Black Love: America’s War on African American Marriage (New York: Seal
Press, 2020). 10.
23
experiences as some of her family members are of various complexions. Conversations on race
illuminated that notions of Blackness in Black witch networks are expansive, inclusive, and
eclectic. The type of Black essentialism prominent in the mid- to late 20th century that excluded
not only people of mixed-race experiences, but also queer and trans people, punks, the erudite,
and anyone who chose not to conform to rigid standards of Blackness, is declining in Black
witch discourse. Today, many Black witches ask African-descended people of various societal
privileges, including those with light skin, financial wealth, able bodies, or a cis normative
gender identity, to deconstruct how their access to status and/or opportunities harms Black
people denied systemic privileges. Through a deconstructive approach, Black witch spaces can
include and love all Black people by aiming for a more equitable world.
Chapter Overview
The chapters of this dissertation have two aims. The first is to name the developing
discourse and demonstrate how it incorporates an Africana orientation and a Black feminist
framework. The second, and more important objective, is to show how an Africana Black
feminist religious discourse is creating individual and communal power in the lives of Black
women and femmes, a power unentangled from institutions of the nation-state.
Chapter One addresses the term witch, its relationship to Blackness, and its use by and
relationship to practitioners of African-heritage religions. It argues that contemporary Black
women and femmes are not merely adopting popularized European language, but rather
employing the terms witch and witchcraft in ways reflective of an ancestral legacy of African
Americans. African Americans accessed these terms to account for a wide array of spiritual tools
used for the cultivation of power under oppressive conditions. The chapter also examines first-
24
person narratives of Black conjurers and witches between the early 19th and mid-20th century,
noting repeated accounts of (what we now might describe as) Hoodoo practitioners referring to
themselves and their practices as witches and witchcraft, explaining that (as Harry Middleton
Hyatt observes) the term Hoodoo only enters the typical African American lexicon after the Civil
War. This chapter argues that practitioners likely adopted the terms ‘witch’ and ‘witchcraft’ to
account for various African-originated spiritual technologies. It specifically illuminates that, as
opposed to Christian-influenced European definitions of “witch,” – definitions that affiliate the
figure with evil, devil alliance, and anti-social behavior – in African American folklore, there are
two witch figures: the hag, or supernatural entity who flies by night to consume a sleeping
victim’s energy, and the conjurer who—like modern definitions of the Black witch—uses her
power for healing, protection, justice, and attraction.
Chapter Two explores identity markers for the Black witch and claims that a Black
feminist Africana religious orientation informs Black witches’ concepts of self, as well as innate
power. I begin by examining Victor Anderson’s critique of ontological Blackness as defined by
liberation theologians like James Cone. Anderson’s analysis aids my conclusions concerning a
Black witch ontology that I maintain refuses to be defined by white supremacy and resists its
confines. Illuminating inherent Black power, I trace accounts of spiritual abilities in Africanheritage religions—including among healers in Kongo cultures and African American conjurers
in the mid-19th century—while examining references to physical attributes denoting innate
abilities like the caul or particular birthmarks. I argue that as Black witches claim their inherent
powers – abilities that have been demonized by Christian supremacy – they are, as Hortense 
25
Spillers notes, “Claiming the monstrosity… [and rewriting] a radically different text for female
empowerment.”31
Chapter Three more deeply examines some of the religiopolitical lineages for Black
witches’ Black feminist Africana religious orientation, focusing on Black religious nationalism.
It starts with a summary of Black religious nationalism, beginning with Black Christian
Nationalism in the early 19th century and concluding with Yoruba religious nationalism in the
late 20th century. The chapter then explores how Black religious nationalist ideologies
(specifically racial separatism and Black divinity) inform contemporary Black witch community
spaces and religiopolitical thought. I observe that Black witches also conceive of political
decisions through a theological lens. For example, many Black witches’ commitment to Blackonly spaces, or Black separatism, derives from a belief that in Hoodoo, the ancestors will only
aid African-descended people. Other theological duties include multi-religiosity, where
participants practice more than one African-heritage religion. I argue that Black witches are
reshaping a religiopolitical lens, moving away from the homophobia, transphobia, and sexism
prominent in previous iterations of Black religious nationalism toward a lens informed by Black
feminism and queer radical thought.
Chapter Four considers how Black witches’ Black feminist Africana religious orientation
is informing broader religious discourse by attending to material manifestation narratives. Within
American mainstream spiritual and religious life, one of the most prevailing dominant discourses
surrounding divine intervention is prosperity gospel—a collection of beliefs that a Christian God
wants to provide believers health, wealth, and success. A growing concern with prosperity gospel
rhetoric is that it omits structural inequality, placing blame on the individual for their lack of
31 Hortense J. Spillers, “Mama’s Baby, Papa’s Maybe: An American Grammar Book,” Diacritics 17, no. 2 (1987):
65–81, https://doi.org/10.2307/464747. 80.
26
social and financial access. This chapter explores how Black witches counter prosperity gospel
narratives by merging an Africana religious orientation and a Black feminist framework that
emphasizes healing and mutual aid. Daizy October Latifah’s Blitch (Black witch) Fund, for
instance, offers money to Black women in need and employs bone divination to decide the
fund’s recipients.
This dissertation is the first ethnographic exploration into Black witch thought. Although
archival, primary, and secondary sources are employed to help provide historical context and
develop broader theoretical conclusions, the aim of this study is to feature Black witches as the
experts of their collective knowledge. Ethnographic methods including semi-structured
interviews, deep hanging out, participant observation, and a personal vulnerability informed by
Black feminism, serve as the methodological and theoretical frameworks that aid in elevating
Black witches’ stories. The project explores the thought-world of Black women and femme
leaders in African-heritage religious communities. It identifies their emerging religious
movement’s motifs, worldviews, moral guidelines, theological beliefs, and political
commitments.
Because most of the Black witches interviewed for this study are influencing seekers
through their extensive social media platforms, “Black Witch Thought” is also a study of how
American religion is changing. Twenty-first-century America is being challenged and reshaped
during a moment when Black Lives Matter has changed discussions about anti-Blackness in the
public square, gender, and sexuality are increasingly celebrated as expansive and diverse,
intersectionality is taught in high schools, and the right-wing is terrified about America’s new
culture wars. Simultaneously Americans are moving away from orthodox religion into a
spirituality informed by concepts like manifestation, intuition, and alignment—notions that are 
27
integrated substantively into Black witch thought.32 As Black Americans hunger for something
more, something beyond Christian hegemony and even Black religious nationalism, Africana
religions are becoming integral to the cultural revolution, and Black witches are at the forefront
of this American shift. Their Black feminist Africana religious orientation (or collective
worldview) reorients seekers toward the West and West-Central African heritage in religions
such as Ifá, Hoodoo, and Vodou, and their Black feminist analysis instills social justice aims into
religious and spiritual practice. “Black Witch Thought” offers a glimpse into how American
religion is changing, who is making that change, and how Black witches are shaping the
emerging nature of 21st
-century American religion.
32 Travis Mitchell, “In U.S., Decline of Christianity Continues at Rapid Pace,” Pew Research Center’s Religion &
Public Life Project (blog), October 17, 2019, https://www.pewresearch.org/religion/2019/10/17/in-u-s-decline-ofchristianity-continues-at-rapid-pace/; “America’s Changing Religious Landscape,” Pew Research Center’s Religion
& Public Life Project (blog), May 12, 2015, https://www.pewresearch.org/religion/2015/05/12/americas-changingreligious-landscape/.
Chapter One:
Healing, Manifestation, and Justice:
African American Witchcraft, 1860-1940
Although witchcraft has been a subject of academic inquiry over the past century, the use
of the terms witch and witchcraft bear the weight of a fraught past, particularly among
practitioners of African-heritage religions.33 In the mid-20th century, most anthropological
studies on witchcraft focused non-European countries, especially Sub-Saharan Africa, where
scholars applied European-derived concepts like “witch” and “witchcraft” to cultures with
distinct traditions and world views.34 By the 1970s, anthropologists and religionists began to
argue for the employment of frameworks native to the actual individuals and cultures discussed
in academic research. They recognized that the terms witch and witchcraft had been incorrectly
applied to African religious traditions in ways that reduced complex practices and beliefs to mere
magic, rife with inaccurate values-based connotations, further characterizing an already
racialized people into one without the skills or intelligence to develop religions worthy of
respect.35
33 The term ‘African-heritage religions’ was coined by Dr. Dianne Stewart and refers to non-Abrahamic religions
that originate from continental Africa. Following the transatlantic slave trade, African people in the diaspora took
what they remembered and developed religions informed by available pharmacology, the religion of the oppressors,
and customs derived from the region of Africa from where they came. Ifá originated from the Yoruba people of
Nigeria, Benin Republic and neighboring West African regions, Vodou is a religion in Haiti, with roots in West
African regions such as Benin Republic, Togo and Ghana, and Hoodoo developed among African Americans in the
Southern United States.
34 Ronald Hutton makes this claim in The Witch: A History of Fear, from Ancient Times to the Present (New Haven:
Yale University Press, 2018) 4. For examples of mid-20th century scholarship on African witchcraft, see E. E.
Evans-Pritchard, Witchcraft, Oracles, and Magic among the Azande (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1976); Hans Werner
Debrunner, Witchcraft in Ghana: a Study on the Belief in Destructive Witches and Its Effect on the Akan Tribes
(Kumasi: Presbyterian Book Depot, 1959), Michael Gelfand, The African Witch: with Particular Reference to
Witchcraft Beliefs and Practice among the Shona or Rhodesia (Edinburgh: E.& S. Livingstone, 1967).
35 For a history of the use of the term witch in academic scholarship see, Ronald Hutton, The Witch: A History of
Fear, from Ancient Times to the Present (New Haven: Yale University Press, 2018) 3-10. For the use of the term in
the application of African traditional religions see, Teresa Washington, The Architects of Existence Àjẹ́
in Yoruba
Cosmology, Ontology, and Orature (Orífín, Ilé Àjẹ́
: Ọyas Tornado, 2018), and for a historical context see, Charles
H. Long, “Primitive/Civilized: The Locus of a Problem.” History of Religions 20, no. 1/2 (1980): 43-61. Accessed
August 06, 2021. http://www.jstor.org/stable/1062335.
29
In recent years, a surge of Black women and femmes practicing African-heritage
religions have chosen the term witch to define themselves. However, they are doing so, not in the
reductive, oversimplifying manner of early 20th century researchers, but in ways that reflect the
spiritual philosophies of Southern African American custodians of African-heritage religions
during that same period.36 Across first-person narratives of Black conjurers between the mid19th and mid-20th centuries, there are repeated accounts of what we now might identify as
Hoodoo practitioners, referring to themselves and their practices as witches and witchcraft.
These practitioners employed the terms witch and witchcraft to account for various spiritual
technologies that brought power to a people living under chattel slavery and the postreconstruction South. They interpreted witchcraft as a powerful tool to be used in physical and
spiritual healing, accountability and protection work for community members, and money and
love attraction spells.
The first-person accounts of practitioners employing the term witchcraft appear most
extensively in Harry Middleton Hyatt’s five-volume collection Hoodoo, Conjuration, Witchcraft,
and Rootwork, where he interviewed over 1600 Black people in the South about their spiritual
beliefs. Although Hyatt’s whiteness reinforced racial power disparities between the interviewer
and interviewees, these volumes are likely the most comprehensive accounts of non-Christian
Black Southern spiritual beliefs. Another essential source is The Born in Slavery Narratives,
which contains over 2,300 first-person accounts of slavery and were collected between 1936 and
36 Hoodoo expert and Black witch Daizy October Latifah posted in her Facebook group “The Witches Brew:
Indigenous Rootwork and Conjure” that “Black conjurers did sometimes refer to themselves as “witches.”36 Daizy is
suggesting that there was a historical use of the term witch before contemporary mainstream identification. See,
Daizy October Latifah, 2018. “Black conjurers did sometimes refer to themselves as witches.” Facebook, September
20, 2018 posted. https://www.facebook.com/october.r.october/posts/2609399932407240. 
30
1938 as part of the Work Progress Administration programs. Although not explicitly stated as an
area of inquiry, these narratives contain vital information about Southern Black religious beliefs.
Other Black first-person narratives include the Journal of American Folklore and Drums and
Shadows: Survival Studies among the Georgia Coastal Negroes. These sources are vital in
determining the terms practitioners used to define themselves versus how researchers categorized
their practices. For example, in Newbell Niles Puckett’s Folk Beliefs of the Southern Negro,
Puckett does not use direct quotations but prefers to summarize his findings. Because he is using
his language and framing, he applies the terms witch and witchcraft in exclusively negative
connotations. Alternatively, had he used the language of his respondents, the term witch might
have been used more diversely.
This chapter illustrates distinctions between Black Americans’ understanding of the witch
as a conjurer and post-medieval European definitions of the witch and witchcraft that affiliate the
figure with evil, devil alliance, and anti-social behavior. This European categorization is due to a
long history dating back to the 14th century, where all forms of magic, typically known as
ceremonial magic, were labeled as a form of Christian heresy and, therefore, devil worship.
African Americans did not assign these same categories to the witch as conjurer because of an
African-originated ethical understanding of the spiritual world that does not delineate strict
distinctions between good and evil. Instead, in African American folklore, there are two witch
figures: the hag, or supernatural entity who flies by night to consume a sleeping victim’s energy,
and the conjurer who—like modern definitions of the Black witch—uses her power for healing,
protection, justice, and attraction.
The archival and primary source materials accessed for this chapter demand new
considerations of the semantic world of enslaved Africans in the United States and their 
31
descendants. Tracey Hucks and Dianne Stewart maintain that when African American spiritual
and religious terms are only understood through a Western Christian and English lexicon “this
interpretative stance invites methodological errors of mistranslation at definitional, conceptual,
semiotic and epistemological levels. [Africana religious studies scholars] bring to our attention
the necessity in black religious studies of acquiring greater translational competency before
interpreting the oral traditions of African-descended peoples in the United States.”37 Thus I
conclude that the terms witch and witchcraft were misinterpreted by American researchers
through their Western, Christian, and English frameworks. Alternatively, late 19th century
African Americans interpreted ‘witch’ and ‘witchcraft’ in ways that reflected the broader
Africana religious orientation evident among contemporary Black witches. This orientation is
based on shared aspects of West and West-Central African religious cultures, including ancestor
veneration, a belief in reincarnation, and a trust in spiritual objects to produce desired results.
Although ‘witch’ and ‘witchcraft’ were demonized and criminalized within Euro-Western
Christian cultures, enslaved Africans invested their own cultural understandings into these terms.
Africans took the concepts associated with their continental traditions, like the belief in
spiritually efficacious objects, and reinterpreted them through European terminology without the
harmful value-laden ethical associations the average American Christian attached to these terms.
Stripped of their maligned ethical associations, witch and witchcraft, I argue, were words to
describe Africana spiritual/religious practices that were emerging and adapting to circumstances
such as migration, commercialization, and oppressive conditions.
37 Dianne Stewart Diakité and Tracey Hucks, “Africana Religious Studies: Toward a Transdisciplinary Agenda in an
Emerging Field,” Journal of Africana Religions 1, no. 1 (January 1, 2013): 28–77. 50.
32
A similar Africana religious orientation applied to the term witch is evident in Hoodoo
expert Daizy October Latifah’s term Blitch (Black witch). She defines it as a
“Conjurer/Rootworker, Hoodoosaint, using spiritual knowledge of African thought,
African/Afrodiasporic spiritual practice, divination, ancestral veneration, and African healing
modalities to heal and fortify themselves, their elders, their peers, and the next generation of
children to be.”38 Like this contemporary definition, Black conjurers in primary source materials
use the terms witch and witchcraft to denote a wide variety of practices emphasizing healing,
justice, protection, and the manifestation of one’s desired result while remaining firmly rooted in
African-originated beliefs and practices.
European Depictions of the Black Witch
Before Catholicism became the prominent religion in Europe, Anglo-Saxons had terms
for magic and magical practitioners, from which the words witch and witchcraft derive.39
Historian Ronald Hutton explains that,
The word “witchcraft” undoubtedly derives from the Anglo-Saxon wicce-craeft,
just as “witch” derives from the related nouns wicce, signifying a female worker
of that “craft” (plural wiccen) and wicce meaning a male one (plural wiccan).
What exactly the “craft” concerned was, however, is a difficult matter. The early
English had more than thirty terms for magical practices and practitioners. The
meaning of some can be recovered, if vaguely, by association with known words
that they embody: thus, galdorcraeft has connotations of song or incantation;
libcraeft of potions; and scincraeft of delusion and phantasm. Wiccecraeft,
however, is not one of these, and can only be understood, if at all, from context.40
38 “BLITCH.” The AfroMystic. Accessed August 07, 2020. http://www.theafromystic.com/blitch.
39 In the 1950s, Gerald Gardner popularized the term witch within Europe and the United States. It was then later
reclaimed by feminists like Starhawk in the 1970s. For a more extended discussion of this movement and the term's
reclamation, see Chapter Two.
40 Ronald Hutton, “The Meaning of the Word ‘Witch,’” Magic, Ritual, and Witchcraft 13, no. 1 (2018): 98–119,
https://doi.org/10.1353/mrw.2018.0003. 103.
33
Although Anglo-Saxons had terms such as cunning men’ or ‘white witches to refer to those
practicing benevolent magic and thus distinguished between harmful and helpful traditions, all
wiccecraeft was not considered evil. European witches were practitioners of any form of magic,
regardless of its ethical associations.41
The Catholic Church then misconstrued wiccecraeft, wicce and wicca to delineate
malevolent magic associated with devil worship. They categorized all spiritual and healing
practices outside of sanctioned orthodox belief and practice as heresy. For example, late Roman
Christians “pulled a significant linguistic trick …: they had extended the traditional Latin term
for harmful magic, maleficium to encompass, and so to smear and demonize, all forms of magic,
including those such as healing spells and divination by oracles, which had formerly been
generally considered acceptable or indeed admirable.”42 In the 15th century, popular texts like
The Malleus Maleficarum were used to spread ideas about women being inherently defective
witches who - because of their hypersexual nature - were prone to sexual relations with the devil.
According to The Malleus’s author, Catholic clergyman Heinrich Kramer, the only way to
eliminate witchcraft was to burn these subjects at the stake. Although most of the resulting
witchcraft trials ended in the 18th century with the spread of capitalism, industrialization, and
secularism, beliefs about women’s innate inferiority and their association with witchcraft
remained in the writings of early 20th century scholarship on African American religious beliefs
and practices.43
41 Ibid.
42 Ibid., 104.
43 See Barbara Ehrenreich and Deirdre English, Witches, Midwives, and Nurses: A History of Women Healers, (New
York City: Feminist Press at the City University of New York, 2010), 31-59. Alison Games, Witchcraft in Early
North America, American Controversies Series (Lanham, Md: Rowman & Littlefield Publishers, 2010), 83-92.
34
With colonial expansion and its Christian proselytizing counterpart, all forms of magic
became conflated under one demonized, child-eating character, the witch. Between 1420 and
1430, we see one of the first documentations of the stereotypical evil witch in areas ranging from
Northeastern Spain to the middle of Italy. Governmental and church officials committed to
eradicating heresy began using propaganda to assign characteristics of cannibalism, orgiastic sex,
devil alliance, and the torment of young children to anyone practicing magic. Judge Peter, who
governed the Simmen Valley in Switzerland between 1390 and 1448, was concerned about
magic in his jurisdiction due to the widespread outcry of citizens claiming that witches were
killing their babies. According to Judge Peter,
…the murderers [the witches] … dug up the little corpses and ate them using
some of the flesh as an ointment that conferred magical powers, including flight
and shapeshifting. The judge used torture to extract confessions of the accused,
not just of baby-killing but of causing a range of injuries to people as well as
offering magical aid to their customers… Peter had no doubt that many belonged
to a devil-worshiping sect with an initiation rite which included abjuring
Christianity and drinking a liquid distilled from a dead infant. He burned both
those who were made to confess and those who refused to do so and seems to
have claimed many victims.44
This subjective stereotyping spurred the witch hunts across Europe, spanning from the 14th to the
17th century, and is estimated to have killed millions. In certain cities, an average of 600 people a
year were killed, and in Toulouse, France alone, 400 were put to death in a day. In the Bishopric
of Trier in 1585, two villages were left with only two female inhabitants each. 85 percent of
those killed were women. Studies have shown that most accusations were about property
acquisition and adjustments to the new economic structure where commercialism versus rural
agriculture dominated. The presence of witches and dark magic also served as a supernatural
44 Ronald Hutton, The Witch: A History of Fear, from Ancient Times to the Present (New Haven: Yale University
Press, 2017). 175.
35
explanation for the daily difficulties associated with early European townships like disease and
famine.45
However, another group of the victims accused of witchcraft included people who were
spiritual service providers employing herbal remedies and the supernatural realm to heal physical
ailments or enact changes in their clients’ lives. Scholars, government, and church officials
intentionally misinterpreted these practices as witchcraft to further their suppression of heresy
and gain political control. In the 1460s, for example, a French professor at the University of
Poitiers, Pierre Marmoris wanted to join fellow French, Italian and German authors in arguing
that there was a new satanic conspiracy of witches. Marmoris, however, had difficulty finding
cases of satanic witchcraft to prove his point and began compiling examples of everyday magic
that he had witnessed. These included “people whom he had seen speaking incantations to heal
animal bites or scare crows off crops, a man of whom he heard at Charlons Sur Marne who could
make himself invisible; a Poitiers woman he had exorcised who claimed to be bounded by an
exotic spell…and legal prosecutions of which he heard for magic to cause impotence.”46 The
labeling of the magical practitioner as a witch is significant when considering 20th century
depictions of Hoodoo practitioners in the American South, as many of their Christian
contemporaries of all races labeled them witches and/or devil worshipers.
Tom Cross’s 1919 article, “Witchcraft in North Carolina,” illustrates the association of
the healer and conjurer with women and tales of witchcraft and evil. Without any knowledge of
African-originated spiritual principles, Cross incorrectly collapsed harming, justice, and various
forms of protection work under the category of witchcraft and associated it with women.
45 Barbara Ehrenreich and Deirdre English, Witches, Midwives, and Nurses: A History of Women Healers, 2nd ed
(New York City: Feminist Press at the City University of New York, 2010). 7-23.
46 Ronald Hutton, The Witch: A History of Fear, from Ancient Times to the Present (New Haven: Yale University
Press, 2017), 179.
36
Alluding to his lack of knowledge concerning the origins of the observed practices, Cross admits,
“The following sketch…was designed originally to deal with only one of the many phases of
folk superstition, witchcraft; but owing to the heterogeneous character of the collections
submitted, it has been a process of time before a sort of omnium-gatherum of North Carolina
tradition regarding magic and supernaturalism.”47 In one instance, Cross summarizes (and labels
as witchcraft) an African originated practice where a “witch prevented a man’s wife from having
a child until the “trick,” which was hidden in the chimney-corner was found, and the spell was
broken.” This “trick” is a spiritually efficacious object. It is likely a version of a mojo or grisgris bag, which is a collection of metonymic and symbolic items compiled to create the desired
result, such as red pepper to create anger, roses to represent love, or items derived from a
person’s body- typically called personal concerns – to specify to whom the work is directed.
Scholars have traced the mojo or gris-gris bag to both Mandingo cultures in West Africa and the
precolonial kingdom of the Kongo in Central Africa, where versions of this practice are referred
to as Nkisi.
48 In another instance, Cross discusses the act of ‘picking up tracks,’ an Africanderived practice that carries similar philosophical meaning as the mojo bag — that items or
images representing a person, such as footprint dirt, may be used ceremoniously to enact some
desired result. In Cross’s description, he claims, “footprints are especially liable to be used by
witches in working their will upon the maker.”49 He then provides a story about a “witch” who
used footprints to break up a couple. “…a negro woman had picked up the tracks of a man and
47 Tom Peete Cross, “Witchcraft in North Carolina,” Studies in Philology 16, no. 3 (1919): 217–87, 217.
48 See Yvonne Chireau, Black Magic: Religion and the African American Conjuring Tradition (Berkeley, CA:
University of California Press, 2006); Katrina Hazzard-Donald, Mojo Workin’: The Old African American Hoodoo
System (Urbana, IL: University of Illinois Press, 2013); Jason R Young, Rituals of Resistance: African Atlantic
Religion in Kongo and the Lowcountry South in the Era of Slavery (Baton Rouge: Louisiana State University Press,
2011); Robert Farris Thompson, Flash of the Spirit: African and Afro-American Art and Philosophy, (New York:
Vintage Books, 1984); Michael Angelo Gomez, Exchanging Our Country Marks: The Transformation of African
Identities in the Colonial and Antebellum South (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1998).
49 Tom Peete Cross, “Witchcraft in North Carolina,” Studies in Philology 16, no. 3 (1919): 217–87, 255.
37
his wife, carried them off, and buried them, interring dog’s hair with the tracks of the man, cat’s
hair with those of the woman. Hence the couple could no more live together than a dog and a
cat.”50 In both examples made by Cross, the mojo bag in the chimney and the collected
footprints, he labels African-originated practices as witchcraft because they can be categorized as
anti-social behaviors and are performed by women, two classifications that defined early
European beliefs about the witch and witchcraft. Today, we would refer to most practices Cross
observed as Hoodoo, which by the mid-19th century, was a unified tradition with initiation rites,
common prescriptions for treating physical and relational ailments, and celebrated distinguished
practitioners.
Within Cross’s discussion of conjure practice that both witches and conjure men
embraced, he genders ethical associations. According to Cross’s framing, when a woman
employs a spiritual practice to harm, he considers it witchcraft, but when a man enacts a similar
intent, it is referred to as conjure and not inherently evil. Quoting evidence of African American
witchcraft in Dalton’s County Justice, Cross depicts an evil Black witch.
They [Black witches] often have pictures of clay or wax (like a manmade of such
as they would bewitch) found in their house, or which they roast, or burry in the
earth, that as the picture consumes so may the parties bewitched consume.
According to a belief current as recently as 1896 in a remoter district of Georgia,
a witch may torture her enemy by baking an image of dough fashioned to
represent the victim and then sticking pins in it.51
Cross continues to reference similar practices, but in the subsequent scenario, a male
‘conjure doctor’ performs the harming ritual. He quotes a documented story taken from a
respondent in Johnston County, North Carolina.
When I was a young boy, my father lived a little east of Clayton, North Carolina.
There was a certain Doctor Duncan who lived somewhat more than two miles
50 Qtd in Tom Peete Cross, “Witchcraft in North Carolina,” Studies in Philology 16, no. 3 (1919): 217–87, 256.
51 Tom Peete Cross, “Witchcraft in North Carolina,” Studies in Philology 16, no. 3 (1919): 217–87, 257. Emphasis
mine.
38
further east. He was known as a ‘conjure doctor.’ He was supposed to work
marvelous cures upon people who had strange ailments. If men had been
bewitched, he could remove the charm. If women wished their enemies to suffer,
he could perform certain curious tricks, and the victim would invariably begin
their downward course.52
In this account, the conjure doctor is a man and has the choice to enact harm or cure illness. He is
described as a “wonder-worker” who “would have been a joke to our household [the household
of the presumably white man telling the story] if it were not for the number of people …who
halted at our door to ask the way to Dr. Duncan’s.”53 Although Dr. Duncan and the unnamed
Black witch are both capable of performing harming rituals, the woman is identified as the evil
witch intent on achieving harm. In all of Cross’s accounts of the witch figure, her victims are
men, specifically men whom the Black witch desires to separate from their wives and possibly
keep as her own romantic or sexual mate, deepening hypersexualized stereotypes of Black
women.
In Niles Puckett’s Folk Beliefs of the Southern Negro, he also genders the witch as a
woman. Folk Beliefs contains over 580 pages of Southern African American
conjure/Hoodoo/witchcraft/rootwork practices. Unlike Harry Middleton Hyatt’s collection,
which consists of directly quoted interviews, Puckett’s text mainly summarizes his findings.
Puckett’s methodology comprised survey questionnaires at Southern Black Universities,
interviews with informants, and references to a significant amount of secondhand published and
unpublished material. Throughout most of the 580 pages of summarized material, Puckett
assigns the pronouns she/her/hers to the witch even after admitting in his opening paragraph that
there are both male and female witches in African American folklore. For example, he describes
how to catch a witch noting, “Since a witch will not step over a broom, one sure way to keep a
52 Ibid., 258. Emphasis mine.
53 Qtd in Ibid.
39
witch from riding you… is to place a broom across your door.” Puckett further explains that “the
hag must count every straw before she can enter” and then uses the descriptive language “old
woman.”54 He also describes violent accounts of how to kill the witch, claiming, “Should you
desire to actually kill the witch, you may do so by shooting her or the animal form she takes.”55
He summarizes one story where a man in Maryland unintentionally married a snake that took the
form of a woman. The man’s friend tells him that his wife is a snake and to put salt in her bread
to reveal her identity, as witches are repulsed by salt. After slipping salt into the bread, the
woman immediately “turned into a snake and ran up the chimney where she was killed.”56
Puckett equated this gendered female figure with evil in ways that resemble both Cross’s
categorization of the conjure doctor as male with positive attributes and the witch as female with
malevolent intent, despite the near-identical ritual practice. Puckett asserts that “In rural districts
of Georgia, reputed witches may lay a spell by baking an image of dough representing a person
and sticking pins into it, thus causing the victim to suffer pain.” Ironically Puckett describes the
same technique to disarm the witch by “making her image in dough, tying a string around its
neck and leaving it to rise. When it is baked, she is strangled so that she can do no more mischief
for a year.” If the practice of baking the dough to represent a person is used by both the witch
and her victim, then the practice is not inherently evil but situational and, in Puckett’s
preconceived notions, depends on the practitioner. In his summary, Puckett uses the term witch
to describe the woman performing harm, but the alleged victim who sought to kill the witch is
unidentified by any identity label or value. Puckett follows this description with a story of Ms.
Boyle, whose old nurse Ellen “sought revenge for some reproaches of Ms. Boyle’s mother by
54 Newbell Niles Puckett, Folk Beliefs of the Southern Negro (Kessinger Pub., 2003), 156.
55 Ibid., 157.
56 Ibid., 161.
40
making a rag image of her and sticking pins into it, ‘calling over and over again, my mother’s
name.’”57 Ellen is presumed to be the witch causing unjust harm to Ms. Boyle’s mother in this
account. Puckett equates harming rituals with women, witchcraft, and evil by strategically
placing these stories next to each other and using the term witch in the first account (note Ms.
Boyle does not use the term witch).
Even Hyatt attempts to equate witchcraft with evil, but because his methodology and
presentation of the material are different from Puckett’s approach, contemporary scholars can
witness the discrepancy between his assumptions and the response of his informants.
Hyatt: You told me about witchcraft. Do the people here today call it witchcraft?
Respondent: Yes - whut dey all calls it, witchcraft.
Hyatt: And they called this when you were a boy – they called it witchcraft, if you
were trying to harm somebody?
Respondent: Yes.
Hyatt: Did you ever hear them call it hoodoo when you were a boy?
Respondent: No, didn’t nevah hear none of dat talk - dey call it witchcraft.58
Hyatt first asks if people call it witchcraft, and after his informant responds yes, he asks
again, but this time includes the phrase “if you were trying to harm somebody” in his description
of witchcraft. Again, the informant responds in the affirmative and adds that they never called it
Hoodoo but witchcraft. The discrepancy here lies not only in Hyatt’s framing of a leading
question but also in his lack of understanding of how Blacks interpreted supernatural practices of
harm and accountability.
Throughout Folk Beliefs, Hyatt’s collections, additional scholarly research, and collected
and crafted narratives of the enslaved, there are countless records of African Americans using
conjure, Hoodoo, and rootwork as a system of accountability when the governing institutions
57 Ibid., 243.
58 Harry Middleton Hyatt, Hoodoo - Conjuration - Witchcraft - Rootwork, Beliefs Accepted By Many Negroes and
White Persons These Being Orally Recorded Among Blacks and Whites, vol. 1, 5 vols., Alma Egan Hyatt
Foundation (New York, N.Y.) (Washington, DC: Hannibal, Mo., 1970), 668.
41
provided no justice for Black people suffering enslavement and then Jim Crow segregation in the
20thcentury. African Americans employed these spiritual tools for protection from the police or
slave owner, to hold perpetrators of sexual violence accountable, get revenge on those who
performed harm, and to protect themselves from institutional and interpersonal violence. For
example, in Zora Neale Hurston’s article “Hoodoo in America,” she documents a spell to keep
the police out of one’s home, which instructs the practitioner to “Take flaxseed and brown sugar
and mix it and throw it at the four corners of the block and officers will never come.” She also
records a spell to “make sick or punish an enemy” where one takes “a soiled undergarment of
theirs, hang on a bare rafter, get some hackberry switches, and whip the garment. They will be so
sore they can’t get out of bed.”59 Based on Puckett’s and Cross’s framings, the rituals recorded
by Hurston could be categorized as intentionally evil witchcraft. However, these practices were
deployed as forms of power for a people who remained structurally powerless under a system of
white supremacy.
 Unlike European depictions of the witch as exclusively evil, African Americans
described witchcraft within an ambiguous ethical ecology, void of sharp distinctions between
good and evil. African American religious historian Albert Raboteau contends that definitions of
evil differed for African Americans as they descended from African philosophical concepts of
supernatural power, which do not possess rigid distinctions. Raboteau notes that “in the slave
community the power to heal and the power to harm resided in one person, the conjurer; in
Africa, these powers resided in any one of the gods who had to be propitiated in order to avoid
misfortune and illness. There is an amoral quality to conjure, which makes it stray outside the
norms of good and evil. The primary categories were not good and evil but security and
59 Zora Hurston, “Hoodoo in America,” The Journal of American Folklore 44, no. 174 (1931): 317–417,
https://doi.org/10.2307/535394, 375-376.
42
danger.”60 Yvonne Chireau echoes Rabetau’s claims adding that this African belief transferred to
African American understandings of the witch. “In the Western Christian tradition of which
Anglo-Americans were inheritors, witches were seen as disciples of the devil, and theologians
viewed witchcraft practices as a form of heresy. In contrast, black American ideas of witchcraft
sprang from traditional African beliefs in the mixed potential of good and evil.” Chireau quotes
one mid-19th century reporter saying, “Negros… seem not to ascribe any undue wickedness or
malevolence to the [witches], as they tend to think of him or her gifted with an unusual capacity
for good or evil.”61 She assesses witchcraft accounts as resembling the trickster character, known
by different names across West Africa and the diaspora, including Esu in Yoruba Ifá, Elegua in
Cuban Santería, and Legba in Haitian Vodou.
The Witch in Hag Form
Some of the early 20th century observer’s labeling of the Black witch as malevolent
resulted from African Americans’ consistent reference to the hag figure who, like Europeanoriginated depictions, is associated with evil doing and anti-social behavior. The hag appears
across the archives as usually an older woman who torments her sleeping victims at night. She
has the ability to shapeshift and often takes the form of a cat or an owl. In human form, she is
frequently someone the victim knows and with whom has ill relations. In “She Come Like a
Nightmare:” Hags, Witches, and the Gendered Trans-Sense among the Enslaved in the Lower
South,” Alexis S. Wells-Oghoghomeh discusses how for most African Americans, the hag was
depicted as a spirit living within a host figure, typically an older man or woman. At night this
60 Albert J. Raboteau, Slave Religion: The “Invisible Institution” in the Antebellum South, Updated ed (Oxford; New
York: Oxford University Press, 2004), 287.
61 Yvonne Chireau, Black Magic: Religion and the African American Conjuring Tradition (Berkeley, CA:
University of California Press, 2006). 84.
43
spirit would leave the host’s body and mount someone nearby who is sleeping, causing them
harm or depleting their energy. She defines the hag as a “trans-sense being” and argues that it
“occupied the liminal space between human and spirit, or, perhaps more accurately, they were
primarily understood as spirits embodied as humans.” She further asserts that this “trans-sense”
is a feature of the hag’s ontology, which she rightly attributes to the “West African cosmologies
from which captive Africans and their American descendants drew to construct the trans-sense
realm in the wake of captivity and displacement.”62 The West African cosmologies that WellsOghoghomeh identifies descend from a few places, including the Kongo, where precolonial
inhabitants believed in a cyclical version of life and death as represented by the Kongo
cosmogram. Unlike Christian theology, where death implies ascending or descending to heaven
or hell, for the Kongolese, a spirit is in a constant state of motion and reincarnation. The
otherworldly realms and their supernatural inhabitants are often nearby, dwelling in the natural
environment.63
Although the exact origins of the hag figure in the transatlantic diaspora are uncertain, it
appears to have African and European characteristics. In African American folklore, like the
European counterpart, the figure shapeshifts into a cat, is primarily depicted as an older woman,
and causes harm to her unsuspecting victims.64 A similar figure is apparent across Africa,
including in the upper Guinea coast among the Mende. They are referred to as the honei and are
62 Alexis S. Wells-Oghoghomeh, “‘She Come Like a Nightmare’: Hags, Witches and the Gendered Trans-Sense
among the Enslaved in the Lower South,” Journal of Africana Religions 5, no. 2 (2017): 239–274. 250.
63 See Kimbwandènde Kia Bunseki Fu-Kiau, African Cosmology of the Bântu-Kôngo: Tying the Spiritual Knot:
Principles of Life & Living, (Brooklyn, N.Y: Athelia Henrietta Press, pub. in the name of Orunmila, 2001), Ras
Michael Brown, African-Atlantic Cultures and the South Carolina Lowcountry (Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 2014), Robert Farris Thompson, Flash of the Spirit: African and Afro-American Art and Philosophy, (New
York: Vintage Books, 1984).
64 See Ronald Hutton, The Witch: A History of Fear, from Ancient Times to the Present (New Haven: Yale
University Press, 2017).
44
described as spirit entities that possess a host and can shapeshift into animal form.65 In The
Things That Fly in the Night, Giselle Liza Anatol argues that the hag figure is a compounded
cultural entity informed by various ethnic factors instead of one direct inheritance. She claims,
“Rather than a direct inheritance model, I believe that the paradigm that works best is the cultural
contact model, which incorporates ideas of retention as well as reinterpretation and demonstrates
a certain amount of cultural fluidity as well as generational conflict.”66 As the hag developed in
African American folklore from a compilation of ethnic factors like Anatol suggests, the figure
began exhibiting particular characteristics specific to the American South.
Unlike observers of the early 20th century, such as Cross and Puckett’s highly gendered
retelling of accounts of the witch, African Americans did not gender the hag/witch with the same
determinacy. For example, in Hyatt’s collections, almost half of the section on hags and witches
describes the hag as a man. However, like its European counterpart where the witch is an older
woman, this male hag is also often an older person. Moreover, some informants do not gender
the hag at all, mentioning the hag’s spirit form or “trans-sense.” Thus, Wells-Oghoghomeh
argues that,
When situated in the context of southern enslavement, the hag constituted much
more than a gendered sanction. Rather, she was an entity whose mythology and
activities expressed bondspeople’s visualizations of uncontrollable violence in
their midst: the externalization of the antagonistic and fatal forces that were
constant specters in the community but could never be fully exorcised from it.67
Although the hag was likely not a reflection of a gender sanction, as Wells-Oghoghomeh
suggests, Hoodoo historian Yvonne Chireau notes that most of the accounts of the hag did refer
65 Alexis S. Wells-Oghoghomeh, “‘She Come Like a Nightmare’: Hags, Witches and the Gendered Trans-Sense
among the Enslaved in the Lower South,” Journal of Africana Religions 5, no. 2 (2017): 239–274. 250.
66 Giselle Liza Anatol, The Things That Fly in the Night: Female Vampires in Literature of the Circum-Caribbean
and African Diaspora, Critical Caribbean Studies (New Brunswick, New Jersey: Rutgers University Press, 2015).
19.
67 Alexis S. Wells-Oghoghomeh, “‘She Come Like a Nightmare’: Hags, Witches and the Gendered Trans-Sense
among the Enslaved in the Lower South,” Journal of Africana Religions 5, no. 2 (2017): 239–74. 261.
45
to her as female.68 An essential and often grotesque site where this gendering occurs is in
discussions about identifying a hag. In repeated accounts, we see scenarios of men employing
violence to harm a witch/hag by striking her in animal form. Hyatt’s collection includes the
following example about a shoemaker and his wife, a hag, who turned into a cat and went down
to the shoe shop where her husband was working.
One of the cats pawed at this man, and while she did it, he grabbed a shoe knife
and hacked at this cat with the knife, and cut one of the cat’s forefeet off. …He
picked up the foot and looked at it. And while he had it in his hand, the foot
turned into a natural hand. And on this hand was a ring. It was the engagement
ring he had gave his wife before he married her, not knowing he had married a
hag.
Cutting off an animal’s limbs and finding a ring associated with one’s spouse is typical in
African American folklore concerning the hag. In another account, a man’s wife is described as
“hag-riding” every night.
And that night that she came in, her husband was in the horse stable when she
brought the horse in. And when she opened the door, he cut her finger off with the
ring [while she was in hag form]. The next morning when he got up, she [as his
wife] had her finger tied up. So, he asked her what was the matter with her hand.
She said she cut it and didn’t know where the finger or the ring was. So, he taken
the ring and the finger and told her, “This is the ring I gave you. You’ve been out
hag-riding with my horse. I was in the stable when you came in. You don’t need
to worry because I am going to kill you.” And he killed her.69
This account is not the only one where there is a reference to killing the hag. Death and
violent retribution are found throughout. However, in these particular stories where the ring is an
identifier, we see a strong female gendering of the hag. Whether the violence that these stories
portray occurred or not, they still perpetuated violence against women and animals. The violence
68 Yvonne Chireau, Black Magic: Religion and the African American Conjuring Tradition (Berkeley, CA:
University of California Press, 2006). 186.
69 Harry Middleton Hyatt, Hoodoo - Conjuration - Witchcraft - Rootwork, Beliefs Accepted By Many Negroes and
White Persons These Being Orally Recorded Among Blacks and Whites, vol. 1, 5 vols., Alma Egan Hyatt
Foundation (New York, N.Y.) (Washington, DC: Hannibal, Mo., 1970). 143.
46
toward the cat—a creature who is often feminized—especially encourages violence toward
women and femmes. Feminist historians have established a correlation between the abuse of
animals and women under patriarchal rule, and contemporary studies have proven the increased
likelihood of male-perpetrated domestic violence incidents when there is a history of animal
abuse.70
Moreover, the added association of the Black cat with the hag further racializes the
figure due to the association of the color black with darkness, evil, and the beast in the Western
cultural imagination—an association that has been pivotal to justifications of colonial conquest
on the African continent and the Americans. Under anti-black colonial rhetoric, Blacks were
denied the category of human and instead assigned the devaluing classification of the beast, thus
spreading slavery’s justification. Animal studies scholar Che Gossett provides the example of the
zoo as a site where the subjugation of the animal and Blackness meet. Gossett argues that “the
awful history of the anti-black racist and colonial exoticizing exhibitions of people of African
descent alongside animals in zoos shows how for blackness the human/animal binary is not only
collapsed but is in fact mutually reinforcing through the violence inherent in the racial-colonial
grammar of animalization – how black people have been historically seen as beasts.”71 The black
cat, her stereotyping as evil and feminine, and the resulting violence ensued upon her by both
whites and Blacks exudes a misogynoir typical of the period.
Unfortunately, most of the available records on African American notions of the witch
exist in documents cited in this chapter, thus making it difficult to ascertain if Black women and
70 See Andrée Collard and Joyce Contrucci, Rape of the Wild: Man’s Violence against Animals and the Earth
(Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1989); Rebecca L. Bucchieri, “Bridging the Gap: The Connection between
Violence against Animals and Violence against Humans,” Journal of Animal & Natural Resource Law 11 (2015):
115.
71 Che Gossett, “Blackness, Animality, and the Unsovereign,” Versobooks.com, accessed October 22, 2021,
https://www.versobooks.com/blogs/2228-che-gossett-blackness-animality-and-the-unsovereign.
47
men were violently persecuted for accusations of witchcraft or conjure. The available data within
criminal records point mostly to witchcraft and conjure persecution of enslaved African
Americans under accusations of poisoning. Whites were fearful of falling victim to lethal poisons
Blacks were known to concoct and use to kill whites or even other Blacks. For example, in a
1729 case documented in the Judicial Cases Concerning American Slavery and the Negro, an
enslaved person is accused of poisoning another enslaved person. According to this court case,
“Among the plantation negros, witchcraft is supposed to be the weapon of Crusquet’s [the
master’s] poisoner’s tribe.” The 1729 case, however, occurred during the beginning of the
American enlightenment period, when religious/spiritual practices were deemed superstitious
and outside enlightenment rational. Thus, in this case, “The law followed by superior court does
not admit witchery, but it does punish poisoners.”72
Violence against Black women was also severely under-documented due to legally
sanctioned violence in the era of slavery and de-facto allowance of perpetration under Jim Crow
segregation. Patricia A. Broussard observes that colonial laws concerning statutory rape were not
applied to Native Americans or African Americans, and under Jim Crow convictions were rarely
established, particularly when the perpetrator was white. Accordingly, Broussard argues that
African American women often decided to remain silent, especially concerning intra-communal
violence, for fear of further violence. She notes that “…few men were ever arrested, much less
tried, for the rape of an African American woman. ...Appeals courts usually reversed the
convictions of both white and Black men who were convicted of raping Black women.”73 We
72 Helen Tunnicliff Catterall and James J. Hayden, eds., Judicial Cases Concerning American Slavery and the Negro
(Buffalo, N.Y.: W.S. Hein, 1998). Vol. 3. 404.
73 Qtd in Patricia A. Broussard, “Black Women’s Post-Slavery Silence Syndrome: A Twenty-First Century Remnant
of Slavery, Jim Crow, and Systemic Racism - Who Will Tell Her Stories,” Journal of Gender, Race & Justice 16
(2013): 373. 405.
48
can extend this contextualization to Black women who were accused of being witches or hags. If
violence toward Black women was generally under convicted, it is unlikely that any
repercussions for witchcraft/hag accusations, such as removing a limb, were tried by authorities.
While it is clear that the hag was popular in the early 20th century African American
imaginary and those accused possibly experienced repercussions, the hag was often separate
from the witch as a conjurer who solely takes human form. In the early 20th century, African
Americans interchanged the terms witch and hag, which maintained distinct meanings depending
on the context. Sometimes the witch could mean the hag as in the spirit who depleted the
sleeping victim’s energy, and sometimes, the witch implied the conjurer who could prevent the
hag’s malicious acts. In the following example, we see a few things happening: the hag is
gendered male, the reference to the hag as an older term, that possibly predates the term witch as
a marker for the hag, and lastly, the witch who stalls the hag’s power. The interviewee relays a
story about a family that was constantly pestered by hags. She informs Hyatt that “they called it
hags in those days,” possibly alluding to witch preserving a distinct meaning when hag was the
common term for this spirit entity. She further informs Hyatt that “Some people would get ‘em.
It seems it would bear on ‘em so hard until they would just holler in their sleep.” Another family
member told this interviewee to sprinkle salt around her bed to deter the hag, and once she did,
“she jumped in her sleep, and when she jumped up, there was a man standing there. He said,
‘Skin! Skin! You don’t know me!’ And the woman caught him. And it was some man that the
woman knew was a witch. And he pulled off his skin and laid it down, then torment her. When
he got ready to put it back on that night, it had salt on it, and he could not put it back on. They 
49
said they caught him and tortured him because this other witch instructed them how to catch
him.”74
Hyatt was one the few ethnographers who eventually realized the distinction between the
hag and the witch; hence in his section in Volume One on hags, he labels it “The Witch in Hag
Form.” However, most researchers of his era were not privy to the difference between the witch
and hag. In “Witchcraft Among the Negros,” for example, the author conflates the figure of the
witch as a hag and the witch as a conjurer. In his descriptions of the witch as a hag, he makes the
following claim.
The negro witches have little in common with our storybooks; they never ride
broomsticks or resort to the thousand and one petty arts of the Saxon or Celtic
witch. Theirs is a far deeper and deadlier sorcery—a power which the negro
firmly believes can waste the marrow in the victim’s bones, dry the blood in his
veins, and sapping his life slowly and surely, bring him at last, a skeleton to his
grave. 75
By noting that the “negro witch” can sap “life slowly and surely,” the author refers to the witch
as a hag who comes at night to draw the lifeforce out of her sleeping victim. A few paragraphers
later, the author describes the Black witch as more akin to a conjurer/healer figure.
Some of these old crones possess a marvelous knowledge of the nature and
properties of every plant indigenous to the South. They have an herb for every
ache or pain and frequently prepare little bags filled with dried roots or leaves to
be worn around the neck as a charm against disease or the ‘evil eye.’76
That this author conflates the witch as the hag and the witch as the conjurer attests to two factors.
First, the author’s vantage point likely stems from 15th
-17th century Euro-Christian beliefs in the
74 Harry Middleton Hyatt, Hoodoo - Conjuration - Witchcraft - Rootwork, Beliefs Accepted By Many Negroes and
White Persons These Being Orally Recorded Among Blacks and Whites, vol. 1, 5 vols., Alma Egan Hyatt
Foundation (New York, N.Y.) (Washington, DC: Hannibal, Mo., 1970). 141. Emphasis mine.
75 Mrs. M. P. Handy, “Witchcraft Among the Negroes [Volume 8, Issue 194, December 14, 1872; Pp. 666-667],”
Appletons’ Journal: A Magazine of General Literature., n.d., http://name.umdl.umich.edu/acw8433.1-08.194.
76 Ibid.
50
witch under the authority of the Catholic Church’s conflation of ceremonial healing magic with
malicious practices and condemnation of witchcraft as heresy. Second, African Americans were
likely using the terms interchangeably to define themselves and their Africana religious
orientation, as discussed in the following section.
An Africana Religious Orientation
Although the witch in hag form was a present figure in African American folklore, witch
and witchcraft were terms also applied to shared beliefs and practices from West and WestCentral Africa—regions of the continent from which enslaved Africans were captured. Hoodoo
scholar Katrina Hazzard-Donald refers to these similarities as the African Religious Complex.
She identifies the belief in spiritual causes of sickness, counterclockwise sacred circle dancing,
and ancestral veneration as shared elements among African religious practitioners. For example,
ancestor veneration is prominent in American Southern Hoodoo and Yoruba Ifá. Among the
Yoruba, the ancestors are referred to as egungun, or egun and practitioners seek out their advice
and protection. In Hoodoo, practitioners also venerate their ancestors and seek material support.
Hoodoo and Ifá are distinct religions with their own cosmology, cultural origins, historical
influence, and specific practices, but the commonality in ancestor veneration speaks to a distinct
African theology.77 According to Religious Studies scholar Dianne Stewart, the African
Religious Complex also includes animal sacrifice and food offerings, manifestations and
mediumship, a belief in reincarnation, and the animation of objects.78 Hoodoo historian Yvonne
77 The African Religious Complex appears, not only on the continent but across the African diaspora. Because
Africans arriving in the Americas and the Caribbean were coming from a specific continental locale, they had shared
beliefs and practices from which to build. Enslaved Africans combined what they remembered with each other and
eventually, over centuries of exchange and repetition of oral doctrine and ritual practice, established regionally
distinct religions such as Hoodoo in the American South, Candomblé in Brazil, and Vodou in Haiti.
78 Dianne M. Stewart, Three Eyes for the Journey: African Dimensions of the Jamaican Religious Experience
(Oxford; New York: Oxford University Press, 2004).
51
Chireau claims the African Religious Complex is characterized by “highly structured
cosmologies, concepts of a diffused monotheism, rituals of sacred mediation, an emphasis on
devotion to ancestors and the dead, and the use of spiritually efficacious objects.”79 These shared
beliefs are the foundation for African-heritage spiritual/religious practice in the United States,
including some iterations of African American Christianity.80 Terms like witchcraft and conjure
merely serve as containers to describe traditions that are anchored in African beliefs as a
philosophical base.
Witchcraft, conjure, and rootwork were European-originated terms that African
Americans used interchangeably to describe an emerging religious tradition that combined
European and Indigenous American practices with beliefs originating from the African Religious
Complex. Specific African concepts and terms, such as gris-gris, Nkisi, and wanga, were
integrated into African American Hoodoo/witchcraft/rootwork/conjure practices. As WellsOghoghomeh, points out “...ndozo, a Mende word meaning “spirit or magic,” became joso,
meaning “charm, witchcraft,” just as awanka, a Temne word for a protective charm, and
wangwa, a Mende reference to an herbal abortifacient, contributed to the widespread use of
wanga as a reference to a “charm” or “witchcraft.”81
The terms Hoodoo, conjure, rootwork, and witchcraft have all been used to imply
engagement with the spiritual and earthly realm to achieve a desired result. Rootwork or
rootworker is occasionally defined separate from the other terms, indicating someone who
exclusively uses herbal remedies to heal physical ailments. Still, because of African-originated
79 Yvonne Patricia Chireau, Black Magic: Religion and the African American Conjuring Tradition (Berkeley, CA:
University of California Press, 2006), 37.
80 See Theophus Harold Smith, Conjuring Culture: Biblical Formations of Black America, Religion in America
Series (New York: Oxford university press, 1995).
81 Alexis S. Wells-Oghoghomeh, “‘She Come Like a Nightmare’: Hags, Witches and the Gendered Trans-Sense
among the Enslaved in the Lower South,” Journal of Africana Religions 5, no. 2 (2017): 239–274. 243.
52
beliefs regarding the lack of duality between spiritual and physical realms, rootworkers were also
often considered conjurers who engaged the supernatural realm to affect change. Chireau defines
conjure as “a magical tradition in which spiritual power is invoked for various purposes, such as
healing, protection, and self-defense.”82 Even with its roots in magic and incantation, Hoodoo is
what many scholars and practitioners would define as a religion and the amalgamation of
centuries of African American spiritual technologies that developed and adapted as soon as
Africans arrived on the American shores.83
Katrina Hazzard-Donald documents Hoodoo’s religious evolution and claims that
Hoodoo as a religion, with established rituals, processes of initiation, and a broadly agreed upon
pharmacology, did not fully develop until the late 18th or early 19th century.84 Before that time,
Hoodoo was not a distinct religion but a collection of practices and cosmological beliefs held by
the enslaved Africans arriving on American shores. Captive Africans were introduced to the
indigenous population’s beliefs, the British Protestant Christian faith, and French Catholicism
upon arrival. Africans added elements of European Christian and Indigenous American practices
to their already rich religious landscape to survive their new oppressive environments and
eventually solidified a distinct religious tradition. Initially, spiritual practices developed with
characteristics specific to each U.S. region. Factors impacting regional development of spiritual
practice were diversity in the land and climate, crops harvested, and the ethnic majority of the
82 Yvonne Chireau, Black Magic: Religion and the African American Conjuring Tradition (Berkeley, CA:
University of California Press, 2006), 12.
83 Historically Hoodoo has been referred to as magic, depriving the tradition of its established structure. Scholars
and practitioners are now referring to Hoodoo as a religion based on ritual protocols, consistently employed spiritual
materials, and documented initiatory rites during the early 20th century. For a discussion of the relationship between
magic and religion, see Yvonne Patricia Chireau, Black Magic: Religion and the African American Conjuring
Tradition (Berkeley, CA: University of California Press, 2006), Introduction. See also Yvonne Chireau, “Video:
Black Magic Matters: Hoodoo as Ancestral Religion,” accessed April 4, 2023,
https://cswr.hds.harvard.edu/news/magic-matters/2021/11/10.
84 See Katrina Hazzard-Donald, Mojo Workin: The Old African American Hoodoo System (University of Illinois
Press, 2013), 55. 
53
enslaved Africans inhabiting the land. For example, in the Southwest or Gulf Coast/ New
Orleans/Mobile region, mainly populated by Senegambian- Mande speakers, Mande terms like
gerregery appear in Hoodoo as gris-gris bags.85 After 1807, cotton became the primary crop
grown throughout the South, which drastically altered the institution of slavery. Enslaved
Africans were moved from one plantation to another as slave owners adjusted to new planting
requirements. For example, tobacco plantations did not require many workers, while one rice
plantation needed at least thirty laborers. As the enslaved moved from one plantation to another,
they brought their regional spiritual practices, which were shared and adopted by other
bondpersons. As regional differences dwindled, a coherent religious tradition developed.86

As a coherent religion developed, the term Hoodoo also emerged. In the latter half of the
19th century, around the same time that Hazzard-Donald suggests the religion of Hoodoo
solidifies, Harry Middleton Hyatt and many of his respondents claim that ‘Hoodoo’ enters the
typical African American lexicon. For example, a few of Hyatt’s respondents inform him that
Hoodoo is a ‘new’ term.
Interview one: Conducted in Fayetteville, North Carolina around 1930.
Hyatt: In the old-time, what did people used to call all this sort of work?
Respondent: Dey called it witchcraft. Sometime de people called it. De ole- time
people cunjurin’.
Hyatt: Did they ever call it hoodoo years ago?
Respondent: De hoodoo? Now, dese late yeahs dey call it hoodoo.87
Interview two: Conducted in Saint Petersburg, Florida around 1930.
Hyatt: When you were a young boy what did they call this kind of work?
Respondent: Cunjuring.
Hyatt: They called it conjuring? Did they use the word hoodoo?
Respondent: No sir, didn’t use dat.
85 Ibid., 37.
86 Ibid., 38.
87 Harry Middleton Hyatt, Hoodoo - Conjuration - Witchcraft - Rootwork, Beliefs Accepted By Many Negroes and
White Persons These Being Orally Recorded Among Blacks and Whites, vol. 2, 5 vols., Alma Egan Hyatt
Foundation (New York, N.Y.) (Washington, DC: Hannibal, Mo., 1970), 1053.
54
Hyatt: It’s a new word?
Respondent: It’s a new word - it come out since ‘mancipation.88
Hyatt notes that the interviewee in the second interview was born in 1858, which he identifies as
years before the word’s appearance. The interviewee’s remarks and historical location might
explain why Hyatt concluded that the term Hoodoo does not appear in the African American
spiritual vocabulary until after the Civil War. Historian Jeffrey Anderson agrees with Hyatt that
widespread usage of the term Hoodoo does not occur until the late 19th century. According to
Anderson,
The English word conjure was in use during colonial times along the Atlantic
Coast but was unknown in the French- and later Spanish-ruled Mississippi River
Valley. Hoodoo, probably already in use before the nineteenth century, seems to
have initially appeared in print during the first half of the 1860s in reference to
practitioners from Memphis, Tennessee. The term’s use increased throughout the
late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, usually but not exclusively in
connection with the Mississippi River Valley. It was not until the early decades of
the twentieth century that African Americans adopted hoodoo to refer to magical
practices outside the Latin Cultural Zone.89
If Hyatt’s respondents and Anderson’s periodization of Hoodoo are accurate about
Hoodoo as a word that emerged in the late 19th century, then it is important to ask what Africandescended peoples in the United States were calling their spiritual practices prior? Unfortunately,
most of the direct narratives from Southern African Americans were collected after
emancipation, with the exception of a few autobiographies from those previously enslaved. Thus,
it is difficult to know with certainty what terms enslaved Africans used for their African-derived
practices during slavery. However, based on the claims Hyatt’s respondents in North Carolina
88 Harry Middleton Hyatt, Hoodoo - Conjuration - Witchcraft - Rootwork, Beliefs Accepted by Many Negroes and
White Persons These Being Orally Recorded Among Blacks and Whites, vol. 1, 5 vols., Alma Egan Hyatt
Foundation (New York, N.Y.) (Washington, DC: Hannibal, Mo., 1970), 667.
89 Jeffrey E. Anderson, Hoodoo, Voodoo, and Conjure: A Handbook, Greenwood Folklore Handbooks (Westport,
Conn: Greenwood Press, 2008), 42.
55
and Florida made, it is possible that ‘witchcraft’ and ‘conjure’ were employed by practitioners
who did not know about ‘Hoodoo’ or were words used before ‘Hoodoo’ became widespread.
What is evident, however, is that witchcraft, conjure, and Hoodoo were all
interchangeable terms to describe various African-originated spiritual technologies. In Hyatt’s
collection and the Born in Slavery Narratives, references to ‘witchcraft’ closely resemble 20th
century descriptions of the practice we now call Hoodoo. One of Hyatt’s respondents in
Waycross, Georgia, noted, “Yo’ go to de fo’ks of de road nine Sunday mornings befo’ sunup.
An’ dat’s to learn de witchcraft-dat’s wut dey might call it. Dat’s whut we call it down in dis
country. Some of us call it rootworkin’. Some of us call it witchcraft, an’ some of us call it
hoodoo, but it’s all run into de same thing.”90 In Hyatt’s records, cases of informants
interchanging the terms witchcraft, Hoodoo, conjure, and rootwork appear across various
Southern locales, but all refer to an Africana religious orientation.
The Witch as Conjurer
Because of their Africana religious orientation, practitioners did not categorize all
ceremonial magic as evil. Instead, ceremonial magic was a belief system that promoted divine
intervention. Thus, for Black Americans, the witch, like the conjurer, could harm, heal or
manifest depending on the desires of the supplicant and/or the practitioner. An understanding of
the witch as conjurer is evident in Born in Slavery: Slave Narratives from the Federal Writers
Project, 1936-1938, which were stories collected around the same time Harry Middleton Hyatt
and Zora Neale Hurston were conducting their ethnography. For example, in Athens, Georgia,
90 Harry Middleton Hyatt, Hoodoo - Conjuration - Witchcraft - Rootwork, Beliefs Accepted by Many Negroes and
White Persons These Being Orally Recorded Among Blacks and Whites, vol. 1, 5 vols., Alma Egan Hyatt
Foundation (New York, N.Y.) (Washington, DC: Hannibal, Mo., 1970), 667.
56
86-year-old Nicey Kinny described being “conjured” by a “witch-man.” “Some old witch-man
conjured me into marryin’ Jordan Jackson. Dat’s de blessed truth, Honey; a fortune teller is done
told me how it was done. I didn’t want to have nothin’ to do wid Jordan cause I knowed he was
jus’ a no count old drinkin’ man dat jus’ wanted my land and stuff. When he couldn’t git me to
pay him no heed hisself, he went to a old conjure man and got him to put a spell on me.”91
Although the ‘witch-man’ in Kinny’s description is, yes, performing an ethically questionable
spell, witchcraft and witch were also terms to describe healers and manifesters capable of
producing the client’s desired result, and diviners with power to see future possibilities
surrounding a situation.
In an interview in The Born in Slavery Narratives, 103- or 104-year-old Ann Parker from
Raleigh, North Carolina, shares a story about her mother, whom she describes as both a queen
and a witch.
…did I tell yo’ ‘bout my manmy bein’ a queen? Yes, she wuz a queen, an’ when
she tol’ dem nigg*rs dat she wuz dey bowed down ter her. She tol’ dem not ter
tell it an’ dey doan tell, but when dey is out of sight of de white folkses dey bows
down ter her an does what she says.
A few days ‘fore de surrender mammy who am also a witch, says ter dem dat she
sees hit in de coffee grounds dat dey am gwine ter be free so all o’ us packs up an’
gits out.
The juxtaposition of the descriptors queen and witch illustrates that witches were viewed as
credible sources of vision and prediction. For Ann Parker’s mother, the witch was celebrated and
respected by other enslaved Black people on the plantation. Although her powers were kept a
secret for possible fear of white persecution, the fellow enslaved respected her as a leading
matriarchal figure when whites were not around. Within African-heritage religions and among
91 Federal Writers’ Project: Slave Narrative Project, Vol. 4, Georgia, Part 3, Kendricks-Styles. 1936.
Manuscript/Mixed Material. https://www.loc.gov/item/mesn043/, 32.
57
my interviewees, witches and priestesses are honored as leading members in their communities.
At Ile Ori African Cultural Center in Atlanta, GA, for example, an African American temple
dedicated to the practice of the Yoruba religion of Ifá, the women are core figures in the center’s
leadership.92 Special greetings are required of anyone initiated into the tradition, and older
women are treated with awe and veneration by the younger participants. Within online spiritual
spaces, witches like Iyalosa Osunyemi Akalatunde are celebrated by younger spiritual
practitioners who often go to her for spiritual services such as divination, ritual work, and
training under her guidance as apprentices. Akin to protocols at Ile Ori, where the priestesses are
consulted before any decision is made, Iyalosa Osunyemi Akalatunde and other witches like her
are considered to have the final word on spiritual conversations and disputes.93 In Ann Parker’s
account, the enslaved Black people trusted her mother’s judgment so wholly that they left the
plantation when she predicted the coming of the Civil War and the end of slavery.
Alongside respected diviners, Black witches in the early 20th century were also healers of
the physical body. Black Americans maintained a significant distrust of white doctors due to a
history of medical experimentation and lack of quality care. Before emancipation, white doctors
were primarily interested in health and healing for Black people as it pertained to keeping them
alive as workers and as someone’s property. These same doctors had dangerous and ineffective
medical practices that often caused more harm than healing.94 After emancipation African
Americans could not afford mainstream medical care and did not trust the doctors that originally
worked for their masters. In Hyatt’s collection, Hyatt speaks with a man in Waycross, Georgia,
92 These are ethnographic examples from my experience as a member of Ile Ori Cultural Center in Atlanta, GA.
Visit, https://www.ileori.com/
93 Iyalosa Osunyemi Akalatunde, In discussion with author, Zoom, July 30, 2021.
94 See Sharla M. Fett, Working Cures: Healing, Health, and Power on Southern Slave Plantations, Gender and
American Culture (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 2002), and Hans A. Baer, Biomedicine and
Alternative Healing Systems in America: Issues of Class, Race, Ethnicity, and Gender (Madison, Wisconsin: The
University of Wisconsin Press, 2001).
58
who, although diagnosed by a medical doctor with inflammatory rheumatism, acknowledges that
the doctors were of no use in curing his illness. His sister instructed him to visit her great auntie
who “…wuz a woman dat worked Egyptian witchcraft all a her life. An de very moment dat she
looked at mah arm, she says, “jes’ wait a few minutes.” She goes intuh ‘er room an’ comes out
wit a little ole vial an’ she begin tuh rub in’ it lak dis, an’ mah arm been straight evah since.”95 In
this account, the practitioner of “Egyptian witchcraft” heals Hyatt’s respondent with a natural
remedy (likely Jimsonweed) of which, assumedly, white doctors were unaware. Black
communities and the witches who served them sought their own form of medical care, relying on
the rich pharmacology of the land around them and their spiritual beliefs and practices from
Africa.
One of the most significant philosophical foundations of Black healing practices was a
holistic one: the belief that the physical body, the mind, and the spiritual realm all affect one’s
health. In African American Folk Healing, Stephanie Mitchem documents how these African
beliefs translated into African American healing modalities. She defines African American folk
healing as,
the creatively developed range of activities and ideas that aim to balance and
renew life… In this view, human life is understood relationally as part of the
interconnected, shared web of the universe…. Consequently, death is not a final
break with life because the spirit/soul continues and may be able to interact from
the next plane of existence. …Within this scheme, …the healer, rootworker, or
conjurer is important. The individual learns to orchestrate or “fix” the natural,
spiritual, and relational aspects of life.96
95 Harry Middleton Hyatt, Hoodoo - Conjuration - Witchcraft - Rootwork, Beliefs Accepted by Many Negroes and
White Persons These Being Orally Recorded Among Blacks and Whites, vol. 3, 5 vols., Alma Egan Hyatt
Foundation (New York, N.Y.) (Washington, DC: Hannibal, Mo., 1970), 1967.
96 Stephanie Y. Mitchem, African American Folk Healing (New York: New York University Press, 2007), 3.
59
This same practitioner of “Egyptian Witchcraft” informed Hyatt’s respondent that “When
ah rub dese things together ah ast de Father in heaven tuh move de pain.”97 Like Mitchem’s
definition of African American folk healing, where the spirit or supernatural energies are very
much a part of physical healing modalities, this healer has not only expertise in the local
pharmacology but is also trained in harnessing the supernatural world to enhance the plant’s
healing power. By calling on the “Father in heaven” to help remove the pain alongside the use of
Jimsonweed, she further blurs the line between the physical and spiritual realms. This blurring
reminds us that neither of these spatial concepts can be assigned exclusively to the rootworker or
the witch since historically, among African Americans, a significant distinction between these
categories has not existed.98
In addition to the spiritual realm, interpersonal dynamics among African and Africandescended people contributed to health and general well-being. According to Albert Raboteau,
“Africans conceived of the individual self… as constituted by a web of kinship relations…. Long
before western medicine recognized this fact, African traditional healers stressed that
interpersonal relations affected people’s health.”99 One of the most significant ways relational
dynamics appeared was through accusations of being ‘hoodoo’ed, conjur’ed, or witchcraft’ed, all
terms employed to imply that someone had evoked the supernatural realm to cause harm. This
act was often an expression of internal accountability systems when the white ruling class could
not be relied on to provide justice within enslaved communities. Hoodoo, conjure, rootwork, and
97 Harry Middleton Hyatt, Hoodoo - Conjuration - Witchcraft - Rootwork, Beliefs Accepted By Many Negroes and
White Persons These Being Orally Recorded Among Blacks and Whites, vol. 3, 5 vols., Alma Egan Hyatt
Foundation (New York, N.Y.) (Washington, DC: Hannibal, Mo., 1970), 1967.
98 See Stephanie Y. Mitchem, African American Folk Healing (New York: New York University Press, 2007), and
Sharla M. Fett, Working Cures: Healing, Health, and Power on Southern Slave Plantations, Gender and American
Culture (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 2002).
99 Qtd in Stephanie Y. Mitchem, African American Folk Healing (New York: New York University Press, 2007),
35.
60
witchcraft were all used to achieve revenge, seek justice, and maintain accountability within
Black spaces. In line with this, Jason R. Young agrees with other scholars about the effectiveness
of conjure as a form of power for enslaved African Americans. Young contends that “conjure
functioned as a form of spiritual resistance that not only challenged the authority of the master
class but also established an independent realm of criminality and justice, outside the immediate
authority of whites.”100 Although witchcraft was the term white folklorists generally applied to
acts of justice, vengeance, and harm across the board, in the following example, we see the term
“hoodooed” used in a harming context and the term “witch” with a positive healing connotation.
In Richard M. Dorson’s article “Negro Witch Stories on Tape,” he quotes a woman
named Mrs. Smith, who associates the term witch with healing in 1908. Mrs. Smith shares that
her Sister Melie became infected with a strange illness that was causing her feet, hands, and face
to swell and itch and, after visiting numerous Western medical doctors, received no cure for her
ailments. Finally, her neighbor suggested that Sister Melie had been “hoodooed” and advised
that she visit “this ol’ hoodoo woman, Aunt Dinah.” Aunt Dinah instructed Sister Melie to return
home and dig into the ground about four feet in front of her bed. Sister Melie began digging and
found a cloth sack filled with “lil’ ol’ wood lice.” She quickly scooped them up and brought the
lice to Aunt Dinah who began ritual work, and soon enough, Sister Melie’s “feet went down, her
head went down, an’ she get back to no’mal. An she lived all them years.”101 Mrs. Smith attests,
“An’ they said this woman that cured her was one of the witches. You know, they tried to get up
everybody that was a witch. They trying to find them out to see who they was.”102 Dorson further
highlights Mrs. Smith’s synonymous use of the terms witch and Hoodoo by writing in the
100 Jason R Young, Rituals of Resistance: African Atlantic Religion in Kongo and the Lowcountry South in the Era
of Slavery (Baton Rouge: Louisiana State University Press, 2011), 139.
101 Richard M. Dorson, “Negro Witch Stories on Tape,” Midwest Folklore 2, no. 4 (1952): 229–41, 230-232.
102 Ibid., 232. Emphasis mine.
61
footnotes, “Note the identification of the hoodoo woman with the witch, in Mrs. Smith’s story.”
He then quotes a respondent in the 1940 collection Drums and Shadows who proclaims,
‘Witches an root men hab duh same magic powuh,’ and that witches are the wives of hoodoo
men.”103
.
Figure 1: Mrs. Davis
Ethnographer Harry Middleton Hyatt standing with his interviewee,
Mrs. Davis who is a healing practitioner of witchcraft.104
Another example of the witch as the healer is extensively documented in volume five of
Hyatt’s collection in an interview with Mrs. Davis, who is both married to a healer and is one
herself. Mrs. Davis informs Hyatt that, “Ah married a witchcraft man. He was uh healah. Some
be blind, some couldn’t hear, some had breakin’-out skin. An’ he would cure those people.”
Like Mrs. Smith’s accounts, Mrs. Davis shares a story where her husband, the “witchcraft man,”
healed a woman who another practitioner had previously cursed. “We was in Louisville
103 Qtd in Ibid., 233.
104 Harry Middleton Hyatt, Hoodoo - Conjuration - Witchcraft - Rootwork, Beliefs Accepted By Many Negroes and
White Persons These Being Orally Recorded Among Blacks and Whites, vol. 3, 5 vols., Alma Egan Hyatt
Foundation (New York, N.Y.) (Washington, DC: Hannibal, Mo., 1970). 2783.
62
Kentucky, an’ a woman comed to our house and she just scratched, yo’ know. All the time she
scratched. So ah said, “yo ‘ mus’ been out in the woods somewhere an’ got some kinda itch.”
She said, “No,” said, “this been on me now fo’ about 5 years,” said “an’ there ain’t no cure fo’
it.” So mah husband come home [and] she say, “Well ah give yo’ $500 if yo’ go an’ git this off
o’ me.” He said, “Yeah, there’s no thin’ in yo’,” he says,” it’s on yo.” By informing the patient
that “it’s on yo” Mrs. Davis’ husband was letting the sick woman know that she had been cursed
and required spiritual as well as physical support. Her husband, the witchcraft man, then gave the
ailing woman what he called a ‘preparation’ to help her heal. Hyatt asks Mrs. Davis if “some
other witch” made the preparation or if he bought it from the store. Mrs. Davis responds, “No,
when yo’ buy, uh, somethin’ from the store, that’s not witchcraft ‘caus witchcraft is something
everybody can’t do. An’ if yo’ go to the store an’ buy anythin’, anythin’ yo’ go to the store an’
buy, ah’m gonna buy. An’ somebody else gonna buy. That’s not witchcraft.” 105 For Mrs. Davis,
the commercialization of witchcraft or the mass production of Hoodoo supplies by untrained
merchants does not reflect the authentic craft. One must be born with the power to evoke healing
and then should be trained in its modalities by a more established witch.
In the same breath, Mrs. Davis amends her statement admitting that since many African
Americans have migrated North and find themselves void of the rich pharmacology harvested in
the South, one can employ the commercial items only with the correct ritual procedures and
when applied in tandem with spiritual gifts. Notably, alongside describing witchcraft as a healing
practice, she also uses the term to imply spiritual harming rituals. She says, “Yo’ can buy the
stuff from the drug store now. An’ bein’ in the city an’ not in the country tha’ yo’ can’t go in the
105 Harry Middleton Hyatt, Hoodoo - Conjuration - Witchcraft - Rootwork, Beliefs Accepted By Many Negroes and
White Persons These Being Orally Recorded Among Blacks and Whites, vol. 5, 5 vols., Alma Egan Hyatt
Foundation (New York, N.Y.) (Washington, DC: Hannibal, Mo., 1970), 4528-4531.
63
woods an’ git it. Yo’ can but yo’ got to know wha’ to ask fo’ when yo’ go there…. Tha’ would
cure witchcraft. But yo’ got to know.” Here witchcraft is something to be cured through
witchcraft. Mrs. Davis attributes malevolent witchcraft to the practitioner’s devil alliance yet
claims that witchcraft should be used for healing purposes. She asserts, “…’cause witchcraft is a
peculiar thin’. Ah’m not to hurt nobody. Yo’ don’ suppose to do tha’. But debe some had sol’ out
to the devil in the place of healin’. They are rebuked in the healin’ part an’ goin’ in their devil
side.”106 Mrs. Davis describes a framework where conjure, Hoodoo, and rootwork possess both
harming and healing capacities. Witchcraft as a field whose ethics depend on the practitioner’s
choices reflects what Chireau and Raboteau describe as a defining feature of African-originated
concepts of good and evil that appear in African American religion.
African Americans also used Hoodoo, witchcraft, conjure, and rootwork to resist the
brutal conditions of chattel slavery. African-originated practices were instrumental in many
uprisings and slave revolt plots, including Nat Turner’s Rebellion in 1831, the New York Slave
Revolt in 1712, and the Charleston South Carolina conspiracy led by Denmark Vesey in 1822.
Moreover, Black women working in a domestic capacity often employed the subtle tactic of
poisoning to harm enslavers.107 Poisoning was one of the most feared forms of retribution by
whites and they actively persecuted people they believed to be committing the crime. Criminal
records documented before emancipation show poisoning as one of the most common forms of
witchcraft accusations.108 Alternative forms of witchcraft not only employed herbs in poisoning
but also invoked the spiritual realm to achieve justice.
106 Ibid., 4531.
107 Yvonne Chireau, Black Magic: Religion and the African American Conjuring Tradition (Berkeley, CA:
University of California Press, 2006), 59-89.
108 See Ibid., 68-77, and Alison Games, Witchcraft in Early North America, American Controversies Series
(Lanham, Md: Rowman & Littlefield Publishers, 2010), 48-55.
64
The WPA Born in Slavery narratives, which provide first-hand accounts of Black life
during slavery, documents a story of a ‘witch doctor’ that harmed his enslaver. In Garland
County, Arkansas, Aunt Clara Walker attests to a “witch doctor… from Africa. [That] didn’t like
his master, ‘cause he was mean. So he make a little man out of mud. An’ he stick thorns in its
back. Sure ‘nuff, his master got down with a misery in his back. An’ de witch doctor let de thorn
stay in de mud-man until he thought his master had got nuff punishment. When he tuck it out, his
master got better.”109 The “little man out of mud” made by the witch doctor is likely derived
from the Kongo-originated nkisi, a manufactured spiritual object that experts would with rusty
nails, pins, or needles to evoke a desired result. In parts of the South Carolina Lowcountry
region, conjure doctors sold “small doll-like figures called “sufferin’ root,” which when named
for an enemy, could cause a complete loss of health as pins were repeatedly stuck into various
parts of the doll’s anatomy.”110
Mrs. Davis - from Hyatt’s collection of testimonies - shares a similar story in which her
grandmother and the famous rootworker Doctor Buzzard use witchcraft for justice. Her Uncle
Willie was once a taxi driver in Florida who mistakenly helped a group of thieves escape after
killing the merchant in a store robbery. The thieves got away, and the police blamed the murder
on her Uncle Willie.
An’ so they was gonna hang Uncle Wille. An’ he was scheduled to be hung at 10
o’ clock. An’ mah gran’ mothah went to Doctor Buzzard… and when she come
back, late, while daylight that mornin’ It turned dark, was a quartah to ten. An’
nothin’ but a lil o’le hole what yo’ fall in. Got four black buzzards an’ they’re just
flyin’ so thick there, yo’ just couldn’t see nuthin. [At the gallows] gran’ma was
109 Federal Writers’ Project: Slave Narrative Project, Vol. 2, Arkansas, Part 7, Vaden-Young. 1936.
Manuscript/Mixed Material. https://www.loc.gov/item/mesn027/, 20-21. Aunt Clara Walker uses the term ‘witch
doctor,’ which appears throughout the WPA narratives, to describe a figure similar to the conjure doctor. This witch
doctor is frequently sought out to disempower the spirit of the hag who is intent on harming practices. Because the
hag and the witch are separate entities, and like how in Mrs. Davis’s story, witchcraft can cure witchcraft, the witch
as conjurer can capture the witch in hag form.
110 Qtd in Jason R Young, Rituals of Resistance: African Atlantic Religion in Kongo and the Lowcountry South in
the Era of Slavery (Baton Rouge: Louisiana State University Press, 2011), 123.
65
walkin’ aroun’ an’ smokin’ her pipe with the stuff that “doctah” Buzzard give ‘er
when she went [to see him in North Carolina.] An’ this what he give her, the one
what was gonna make it turn dark that wus witchcraft because when they hang
yo’ if they said 10 o’clock it have to be 10’ clock. An’ aftah 10 o’ clock if they
didn’ hang yo’ then one minute aftah they have to cut yo’ down. So it turned dark.
An’ they couldn’ do nothin’ with these black birds. When it did start to lighten up,
it was 10 minutes aftah eleven. An’ they had to cut him down.111
According to Mrs. Davis, her grandmother was practicing witchcraft by smoking Doctor
Buzzard’s herbs at the gallows, which caused Uncle Wille’s release. Mrs. Davis does not share
the race of the robbers who jumped in her uncle’s taxi nor the race of the store owner who was
killed. It is likely, however, that either the store owner or the robbers were white, and her uncle’s
conviction was racially motivated based on the town’s immediate inclination to hang him. For
Mrs. Davis, the use of witchcraft was necessary justice.
Lastly, like contemporary Black witches, informants in the early 20th century identified
witchcraft with spiritual manifestation practices. By manifestation, I am referring to the process
by which practitioners evoke the spiritual realm to create some form of material abundance. In
the Born in Slavery Narratives, Zora Neal Hurston’s research, and Harry Middleton Hyatt’s
collection of the early 20th century, we mostly see spiritual technologies such as mojo bags for
luck in gambling and in acquiring employment. This was a period when African Americans were
only about fifty to one hundred years post-emancipation, reconstruction in the South was
devastated by Jim Crow, and most of the available work was sharecropping, which replicated to
varying degrees, forced servitude. Economic resources were minimal; thus, luck in gambling was
a financial necessity as it was one of the few ways money circulated within Black communities.
111 Harry Middleton Hyatt, Hoodoo - Conjuration - Witchcraft - Rootwork, Beliefs Accepted By Many Negroes and
White Persons These Being Orally Recorded Among Blacks and Whites, vol. 5, 5 vols., Alma Egan Hyatt
Foundation (New York, N.Y.) (Washington, DC: Hannibal, Mo., 1970), 4543-4545.
66
We also see charms for attracting the desired job, especially as the likelihood of being Black and
employed and paid a decent wage by racist white Southerners were slim.
In Saint Petersburg, Florida, in 1970, Hyatt interviewed a man, identified as ‘The
Prophet,’ who had spent 17 years practicing witchcraft. He shared with Hyatt a ritual prescription
for attracting work that included putting enchanted Bluestone powder in one’s shoe when
making a job request. The Prophet then told a story about a client who performed this ritual and
received work that day. The Prophet reflected,
He said he excited. He nevah had—ya see the people nevah had a mir’cle happen
in theah lives. It sometin’ to make them excited about. This is the thin’ I say,
make some of us that work in thah the field of mir’cles—as they say sometime
relatively speakin’ differen’—is becuz everything we wan can be had. If we had
thuh one thing, Thuh key to open the door wit our mind an thuh comb-nation thah
will make us magnetic tuh whoeveh we go tuh.112
The amount of positivity and hope in this passage is astounding, especially for a people
faced with financial poverty resulting from racist institutional abuse and segregation.
Witchcraft/Hoodoo/conjure all provided tangible material outcomes for a people situated in
extreme lack and fostered a hope that the energies of the divine would not let them suffer.
Before sharing this story, The Prophet tells Hyatt, “An ‘ in the last, uh seventeen year, ah
have been workin’ exclusively in thuh field of Voodoo, or Hoodoo as yo’ called it, an
witchcraf’.”113 Note that in this statement, The Prophet says that the terms Voodoo and Hoodoo
are terms that Hyatt uses—as yo’ called it—and he continues that he works in the field of
witchcraft. This statement reflects earlier claims made by Hyatt’s other respondents, who suggest
112 Harry Middleton Hyatt, Hoodoo - Conjuration - Witchcraft - Rootwork, Beliefs Accepted By Many Negroes and
White Persons These Being Orally Recorded Among Blacks and Whites, vol. 5, 5 vols., Alma Egan Hyatt
Foundation (New York, N.Y.) (Washington, DC: Hannibal, Mo., 1970). 4679.
113 Ibid., 4614.
67
that ‘witchcraft,’ ‘Hoodoo,’ and ‘conjure’ are all interchangeable. It might also be regionally
specific where ‘witchcraft’ is primarily employed in Saint Petersburg, Florida.
Moreover, The Prophet’s use of the term field illustrates the variety in practice. If we
consider an academic field with various areas of specialization, witchcraft, for practitioners like
the Profit, also has subdivisions. The subdivisions are areas discussed in this section, such as
divination for the Queen/witch, healing for Mrs. Davis and her husband, justice for Aunt Clara,
and manifestation for The Prophet. Like Hoodoo, conjure, and rootwork, witchcraft could imply
engagement with the spiritual realm for any desired outcome, regardless of ethical associations.
Conclusion
It is vital to highlight that the terms witch and witchcraft (and the negative connotations
associated with the practice, as well its women practitioners) are Western categories and values
that African-descended peoples interpreted through their African-originated philosophical
systems. As a result of European expansion and conquest, European associations of the term with
devil alliance and other anti-social behaviors have a long legacy in the persecution of healers
worldwide. Practices typically associated with ceremonial magic quickly became lumped under
the Catholic Church’s umbrella of heresy, and those accused of practicing magic were persecuted
by law. In America’s early 20th century folklore material, researchers like Cross and Puckett
equated the terms witch and witchcraft with evil. They thus misapplied the categorization to
African American Southern spiritual practices and beliefs, failing to recognize the distinction
between the witch as the hag figure and the witch as the conjurer.
Additionally, like their European predecessors, many early 20th century observers
assumed all practices labeled witchcraft were ill-intentioned and further gendered the figure of 
68
the witch, only associating witchcraft with women seeking to harm. Unlike these white outsiders,
African Americans imagined the witch as a conjurer, a healer, and someone who could enact
justice in their community. No different from Hoodoo, conjure, and rootwork, African American
witchcraft encompassed myriad practices that could harm or heal depending on the practitioner’s
wishes. Today, we see a similar Africana religious orientation in the Black witch. She, too, uses
the term witch to define herself but not in reference to European magic or as a category of evil.
Instead, she is approaching her engagement with spiritual technologies from an Africana
religious foundation and, when combined with a Black feminist framework, understands the
Black witch to be an ontology of power.
Chapter Two:
Defining the Self:
An Africana Ontology of Black Feminist Power
As Chapter One established, the witch’s being, her ontology, has primarily been defined
as an innate ability and subsequent propensity to harm. Early 15th
-century European stereotypes
outlined in texts like the Hammer of Witches, characterize her as a hypersexualized, devil
worshiper and destroyer of men. Although African Americans at the turn of the 20th century had
more nuanced versions of the witch—characterizing her mainly as a conjurer—negative images
still loom, resulting in many self-identified witches (and non-identified people with innate
abilities) quieting their power for fear of retribution. My research shows that most self-identified
contemporary Black witches, however, do not fear their power and – through mentorship or
initiation into a religion – have found tangible ways to harness these abilities.
I spoke with 30 Black women and femmes in New Orleans, Detroit, New York, Atlanta,
and Baltimore. Each one is actively contributing to Black witch discourse by publishing books
and disseminating information on social media. Almost every interviewee with whom I spoke
expressed an innate ability to connect with the divine. They do this through seeing or hearing the
dead, witnessing glimpses of the future, or gathering information about a stranger through
physical touch. Most of the witches I interviewed described these abilities, not as gifts bestowed
upon them by a divine entity outside of themselves, but as something intrinsic—an ontological
is-ness inseparable from and innate to their being. These abilities distinguish the Black witch
from non-witch spiritual practitioners or religious initiates that might employ spiritual
technologies to engage the divine but do not possess this power within themselves. However, this
is-ness of the witch with abilities to see the future or connect with the dead is not unique to the 
70
Black witch. White and other non-Black witches have similarly discussed these abilities as being
a known part of themselves since childhood.114 What is unique, however, is the Black witch’s
Africana religious orientation – her approach to notions of the self and spiritual practice that
emerge out of shared West and West-Central African religious principles. Out of her engagement
with African-heritage religions— most frequently Yoruba-originated Ifá and African American
Hoodoo—the Black witch constructs an Africana religious orientation. Thus, an interdependent
relationship emerges where ontological power can be interpreted through their Africana religious
orientation. Moreover, the Black witch also understands herself and her power through a Black
feminist consciousness. Like the white witches of the 1970s and 1980s who associated the witch
with women’s resistance, the Black witch often sees her being as oppositional to patriarchy. But
as a Black woman or femme-identified person, she recognizes that her ontology opposes
patriarchy and, in reclaiming a powerful, self-actualized self, opposes misogynoir. Through her
identification with an ontological Black feminist Africana-informed power, she, as Black
feminist scholar Hortense Spillers describes, is “claiming the monstrosity”115 of both Blackness
and the witch. To further comprehend this ontology of interdependent powers, let us begin by
exploring Black ontology in the field of religion.
Black Ontology
Ontology is typically understood as an aspect of metaphysics that frames categories of
being. In the study of Black religion, ontology has primarily been discussed by theologians
through reflection on Black ontology. Most notably, James Cone argues that ontological
114 Based on discussions with white and non-Black witches.
115 Hortense J. Spillers, “Mama’s Baby, Papa’s Maybe: An American Grammar Book,” Diacritics 17, no. 2 (1987):
65–81, https://doi.org/10.2307/464747. 80.
71
Blackness is defined by the experience of anti-Black racism, survival, and resistance within its
confines. In his 1970 book, A Black Theology of Liberation, Cone writes that the Black
experience is a “totality of black existence in a white world where babies are tortured, women
are raped, and men are shot… The black experience is existence in a system of white racism.”116
But also, for Cone, Black existence is shaped by resistance to this oppressive state. It is where
“…blacks recognize that it is incumbent upon them to throw off the chains of white oppression
by whatever means they regard as necessary,”117 which can involve “…attacking the enemy of
black humanity by throwing a Molotov cocktail into a white-owned building and watching it go
up in flames.”118 For Cone, as Black people experience anti-blackness while resisting oppressive
brutality, they internalize and construct a divine notion of self. Cone claims Blackness is,
…catching the spirit of blackness and loving it. It is hearing black preachers speak
of God’s love in spite of the filthy ghetto, and black congregations responding
Amen, which means that they realize that ghetto existence is not the result of
divine decree but of white inhumanity… Black soul is not learned; it comes from
the totality of black experience, the experience of carving out an existence in a
society that says you do not belong.119
Womanist theologians espouse similar beliefs, albeit they incorporate more analysis of the interplay
between gender and race. Emilie Townes, for example, defines a womanist ontology as,
…a radical concern for is-ness in the context of African American life. This
concern for being is not rooted in trans empirical realities or with a world behind
the world of Black life in the United States. Its primary concern is concrete
existence (lived life) and the impetus for a coherent and unified relationship
between body, soul, and creation. In this sense, it is consonant with African
cosmology that understands all of life as sacred. A womanist ontology seeks to
rediscover this apprehension in Black life in the United States.120
116 James Cone quoted in Victor Anderson, Beyond Ontological Blackness. (London: Bloomsbury Publishing, 2016).
88.
117 Cone quoted in Ibid., 89.
118 Cone quoted in Ibid.
119 Cone quoted in Ibid.
120 “To Be Called Beloved : Womanist Ontology in Postmodern Refraction | Semantic Scholar,” accessed July 5,
2022, https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/To-Be-Called-Beloved-%3A-Womanist-Ontology-inTownes/6e919b42dd3c4a9e23f198d936d156da3b4f3046. 94.
72
Both Townes and Cone emphasize that Black ontology is characterized by its contextual
existence. Blackness is in its relationship to white supremacy. Townes further elaborates, “The
task of a womanist ontology is to illuminate, question, and begin the eradication of radical
oppression and devaluation of the self and the community in the context of structural evil.”121 In
Beyond Ontological Blackness, Victor Anderson highlights an essential missing piece of the
argument that Blackness is ontologically informed by white supremacy. Anderson argues that if
a Black ontology is contingent on whiteness for its existence—both in survival and in its cultural
and internalized iterations —then true liberation can only exist in theory. He contends that by
this definition, “Blackness cannot exist without white domination. Existentially, the new black
being remains bound by whiteness. Politically, it remains unfulfilled because blackness is
ontologically defined as the experience of suffering and survival.”122 By Anderson’s
observations Blackness is thus null without white violence and its supposed supremacy. This
theological conundrum leaves out the space for a liberatory world for Black beings without the
violence of anti-Blackness or a world where the self is not defined by its harm.
In the mid-to-late 20th century, a significant number of African Americans were leaving
the church due to radical Black thought. They turned to the Nation of Islam, the Moorish Science
Temple, Kemetic traditions, orisa/Yoruba-based religions, and even New Age eclecticism. These
religious movements offered a more ‘authentic’ connection to Africa. For example, Wallace Fard
Muhammad, founder of the Nation of Islam, told Black Americans that Islam was the true
religion of the Black man. The Black church, although often a place of solace and support during
Black uprisings, was based on presumably European-derived ecclesiology and white theological
accounts. Moreover, it largely failed to address the political concerns of the most under121 Ibid., 115.
122 Victor Anderson, Beyond Ontological Blackness. (London: Bloomsbury Publishing, 2016). 93.
73
resourced African Americans due to its strong assimilationist agenda. Christianity thus became
understood as the white man’s religion with little application to Black life.123 Anderson notes
that as African-Americans sought to connect to their African heritage and began leaving the
Black church, Black liberation theologians felt inclined to prove Christianity’s authenticity as a
Black/African religion.
In the mid-20th century, Black liberation theologians began accessing Black sources,
including slave narratives, African-heritage religions, and folklore, to legitimize the identity of
the Black church. Scholars like Dwight Hopkins argue that the theology of enslaved Africans
was the blending of “white Christianity with the remains of African religions under slavery.”124
However, Hopkin’s engagement with African-heritage religions remains merely superficial and
seems only to aim to authenticate Black Christian theology. For instance, Hopkins casually
compares African gods with Hebrew ones to demonstrate similarities in theological thinking and
attributes Black community formation (versus individualism) as inherently African and
derivative of African-heritage religions.125 Emilie Townes alludes to this African past as well
when she mentions an “African cosmology that understands all of life as sacred,”126 but she, like
Hopkins, does not further engage specific aspects of this African cosmology. Black witch
ontology differs from this limited Black Christian ontology in a few ways.
Black witch ontology, first, is profoundly shaped by an Africana religious orientation
because Black witches practice African-heritage religions. An African cosmology is not
superficially mentioned. Rather, it is deeply engaged with as a religious and spiritual way of life,
123 See Gayraud S. Wilmore, Black Religion and Black Radicalism: An Interpretation of the Religious History of
African Americans, 3rd ed., (Maryknoll, N.Y: Orbis Books, 1998).
124 Victor Anderson, Beyond Ontological Blackness. (London: Bloomsbury Publishing, 2016). 94.
125 Ibid., 95-96.
126 “To Be Called Beloved : Womanist Ontology in Postmodern Refraction | Semantic Scholar,” accessed July 5,
2022, https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/To-Be-Called-Beloved-%3A-Womanist-Ontology-inTownes/6e919b42dd3c4a9e23f198d936d156da3b4f3046. 94.
74
ultimately informing how the Black witch understands herself. Furthermore, instead of being
defined by resistance to white supremacy (and therefore reliant on its existence), Black witch
ontology is characterized by Black power, in the most literal sense—varying powers such as the
ability to see the future, heal through energy transfer, feel the emotional state of others through
physical touch, or call on spiritual entities to manifest desired results. These powers exist
independent of whiteness and characterize the Black witch’s multiple iterations in precolonial
states - such as the Ndoki in the kingdom of the Kongo or Iyami Aje among the Yoruba.
Religion and the Black Witch
Almost all of the Black witches interviewed for this study practice an African-heritage
religion. Some are deeply invested through the long and dedicated process of initiation, while
some are solely practitioners engaging in Africana religious rituals, following cosmologies, and
venerating deities. Most respondents practice African American Hoodoo, Yoruba originated Ifá,
or Haitian Vodou, and accordingly identify as Manbos, Iyanifas, Iyalosas, and Rootworkers as
well as Black witches.127 Black witches view these religions as distinct traditions and—alongside
a profound honoring of the practitioners that aided in their religions’ development—recognize
the religions for their complex and unique rituals, cosmologies, and established hierarchies.
Unlike the early 20th century witches, who used “witchcraft” to refer to what is now widely
known as Hoodoo, contemporary Black witches do not typically employ the term to denote any
particular religion. Witchcraft usually refers to a broad engagement with the spiritual realm,
natural world, or use of personal power, while Hoodoo refers to the religion with established
rituals and protocols solidified in the 19th century. More commonly, the women and femmes in
127 Mambo is a priestess in the Haitian Vodou tradition. Iyanifa and Iyalosa are initiated into Yoruba-derived
religions. Rootworkers are Hoodoo experts.
75
this study distinguish the Black witch as an ontology, a self of power that employs and engages
established religious traditions.
 Sam, also popularly known as Juju Bae, addressed some of the differences between
religion and ontology. She is a young woman in her late 20s and, after attending the historically
Black institution, Spelman College in Atlanta, Georgia, moved to Baltimore, MD, to pursue her
life as a content producer. Sam now identifies as a “spiritual advisor, medium, Hoodoo
practitioner” and is currently one of the most prolific Black spiritual leaders on social media.
Through her podcast, social media posts, workshops, and spiritual services, Sam advocates for
“Black folks returning to our ancestral ways… [and aims] to help us all tap into our own innate
powers to successfully manifest our own realities.”128 In her podcast episode 15, “There’s more
to this Witch Sh*t,” she discusses what she means by innate powers.
Not everyone is a witch. Sometimes people confuse being a priest or practicing
some African traditional religion or some type of religion outside of Christianity
as witchcraft… A witch has innate powers. Generally, a witch don’t need no
initiation into any tradition to work their sorcery. Just because you are initiated
don’t mean that you gain powers. You either got it, or you don’t. Every priest
can’t manifest or get you out of certain situations. They learn the tools to assist
you, but that doesn’t mean that they come with power.
Here, Sam makes an important distinction, one that is crucial when discussing the Black witch,
witchcraft, and Africana religions. Initiated priests and priestesses within these traditions are not
inherently witches; they are trained in a specific religious lineage. Although Black witches can
practice these religions, their innate power is not dependent on rituals, deities, or spiritual
technologies to communicate with the dead or achieve desired results.129 This distinction lies in
differences between the subject and ontology.
128 Juju Bae, “A Little Juju Podcast,” itsjujubae.com, accessed September 30, 2021,
https://www.itsjujubae.com/podcast.
129 Some initiated priests and priestesses also possess innate power and do not identify as witches because of its
negative historical connotation. 
76
The subject, as understood through a branch of continental philosophy, is shaped by and
through external influences impacting the sense of self. Factors such as gender roles, cultural or
ethnic expectations, class disparity, and subsequent ideological convictions inform how the
subject is fashioned. The subject is thus a social construction.130 The religious subject is further
shaped by what Pierre Bourdieu calls a habitus, or one’s repeated practices informed by socially
acceptable behaviors. These behaviors ultimately produce the subject’s conditioning, who then
performs unconscious acts based on the likely response from their community. Over time these
acts become integrated into the body to such a degree that they become part of the self.131 As an
example of how habit produces subjectivity, Saba Mahmood describes a young Muslim woman
who, after repeatedly wearing the hijab, felt herself become more pious. The material act and
subsequent response to her veiled body informed the religious subject.132 In Africana religious
studies, scholars have highlighted how repeated ritual and domestic acts shape practitioners’
subjectivity. In her ethnographic study of Lucumí devotees in Chicago— Elizabeth Pérez argues
that the religious subject is formed through daily habitual practices such as cooking or abstaining
from alcohol. Pérez identifies these acts as micro-practices, arguing that they shape both the
subject as well as the religion itself.133 M. Jacqui Alexander also discusses how spirituality
becomes what she calls a type of “body praxis.”134 Like sleeping, eating, and getting sick, the act
of serving the Lwa in Haitian Vodou or engaging in orisa rituals becomes a habituation of the
130 Michel Foucault and other post structuralist scholars discuss the subject as a social construction. See Michel
Foucault, “The Subject and Power,” Critical Inquiry 8, no. 4 (1982): 777–95.
131 Pierre Bourdieu Outline of a Theory of Practice, Cambridge Studies in Social and Cultural Anthropology 16
(Cambridge: Cambridge Univ. Press, 2010).
132 Saba Mahmood, Politics of Piety: The Islamic Revival and the Feminist Subject (Princeton, N.J: Princeton
University Press, 2012). 50-51.
133 Elizabeth Pérez, Religion in the Kitchen: Cooking, Talking, and the Making of Black Atlantic Traditions (New
York: New York University Press, 2016).
134 M. Jacqui Alexander, Pedagogies of Crossing: Meditations on Feminism, Sexual Politics, Memory, and the
Sacred (London: Duke University Press, Combined Academic, 2006), 297.
77
body—a mechanism of unconscious action. Alexander claims, “Far from being superficial, these
markings on the flesh – these inscriptions – are processes, ceremonial rituals through which
practitioners become habituated to the spiritual, and this habituation implies that requirements
are transposed onto the body.”135 Religion shapes the subject through habitual, repeated practices
producing an embodied knowing of the divine. But the Black witch – born with innate powers –
is innately divine, not dependent on religion for her abilities to manifest, internally or externally.
The divine is not outside the Black witch but intrinsic to her Black being.
However, the ontological status of the Black witch does not negate the effects religion
has on informing her subjectivity. The two are not in opposition. For Black witches, religion is
often the structure through which she harnesses her natural capabilities and enhances her power.
Hereditary witch, Iyalosa Osunyemi Akalatunde shared how becoming initiated in Ifá helped her
harness her innate ability to interact with spirits. Iyalosa Osunyemi, a woman in her early 50s, is
initiated to Osun, practices Hoodoo, is a pivotal founder of the Black witch movement, and is a
scholar completing her Ph.D. at Florida State University. She has been mentoring and
influencing Black witches through her YouTube channel that began over 11 years ago, and
through Black witch classes that cover topics such as “Africanjujuism: Importance of the Black
Woman’s Narrative” and a class called “All Witchcraft is Black.” She also has a large social
media following where she engages in thoughtful dialog on topics of religion, race, and gender
and is regarded as a voice of authority in online community spaces. Iyalosa Osunyemi shared,
I watched my mother and my grandmothers not be able to handle how volatile the
energies were. They didn’t know they could set parameters around their
interactions with spirits. …Getting initiated made my engagement with spirits
safer because of its protocol. There’s a space in your house to do work with your
ancestors, and there’s a space for Osun so they can’t bleed over into other areas
135 Ibid. 
78
and make … life chaotic. Initiation very much kept me from seeing my abilities as
chaos. Instead, it can just be a way of communication.136
In New Orleans, LA, I sat with Laurita Marie, a woman in her mid-life who is initiated
into both Haitian Vodou and Lucumi. She is a leading member of her New Orleans community
by organizing burlesque shows, working with youth LGBTQ+ groups, and conducting religious
ceremonies. Like Iyalosa Osunyemi, she shared that after initiation, her capacity to feel spirits
and energy became more powerful.
I had always heard and saw spirits but was afraid of them as a kid. I prayed for
them to go away, and they did. It wasn’t until I set up my egun [ancestor] shrine
that spirits started coming back, and I could hear them again. My clairvoyance
and clairsentience have enhanced since getting my hand of Ifá. And since I’ve
come back from Itefa [initiation], my dreams have become more vivid.137
Iyalosa Osunyemi and Laurita’s relationship with religion is typical of Black witch thought. In
my interviews, almost every respondent spoke of natural abilities such as clairvoyance or
clairsentience. Through mentorship and initiation into established African-heritage religions,
they enhanced their innate powers. Furthermore, the Black witch’s combined experience of being
of African descent and a practitioner of African-heritage religions distinguish her from white and
non-Black witches who might also possess ontological powers.138
Black witch and expert Hoodoo practitioner Daizy October Latifah’s definition of Blitch
(Black witch) emphasizes engagement with Africana spirituality. As mentioned in Chapter One,
she defines a Blitch as a “(Conjurer/Rootworker/Hoodoosaint) using knowledge of African
thought, African/Afrodiasporic spiritual practice, Divination, Ancestral veneration, and African
healing modalities to heal and fortify themselves, their elders, their peers, and the next
136 Iyalosa Osunyemi Akalatunde, in discussion with author, July 30, 2021.
137 Laurita Marie, in discussion with author, June 23, 2021.
138 To identify as a Black witch, someone must be of African descent not only because of the racial term “Black” but
also because, as discussed in Chapter Three, many community members believe practitioners should possess an
ancestral connection to African-heritage religions.
79
generation of children to be.”
139 Here, there is an emphasis on African-descended practices and
beliefs to qualify the Black witch. My research indicates that this sense of self is articulated
differently than that of Black women and femmes practicing European-derived traditions.
Although they continue to identify as Black, witches working within a European tradition do not
reflect the type of Black witch Daizy has so eloquently defined above, the same witch that serves
as the focus of this study.
In July 2021, for example, I attended Witchfest USA – a “Pagan Faire Festival Event for
all from the Heart of New York City through the Magicks of The World Wide Web.” I virtually
attended two days of workshops by self-identified witches of various religious and spiritual
affiliations. Although the founder Reverend Starr RavenHawk is a Black woman and Pagan
witch, Witchfest does not reflect the Black witch ontology discussed within this text. Instead, it
reflects a lineage of primarily white pagan witches who began popularizing their craft in the
1970s with the fame of Laurie Cabot, her Salem, Massachusetts store, and her mentorship of
witches, including Starr RavenHawk.140
Witchfest USA was overwhelmingly white, exhibited racist overtones and
microaggressions that tend to occur in predominantly white spaces. Of a total of 66 presenters,
ten are known (to me) to be of color, eight of which are known to be Black.141 Alongside
spiritual practices without religious affiliation – often categorized under the umbrella of
witchcraft – religious traditions represented at this event included Wicca, Druidry, Hoodoo, and
a variety of loosely affiliated East Asian beliefs and practices. Hoodoo was the most frequently
139 Daizy Latifah, “BLITCH,” The AfroMystic, accessed January 20, 2022, http://www.theafromystic.com/blitch.
140 See “Starr RavenHawk,” Festival of Witches, accessed January 5, 2023, http://www.festivalofwitches.com/starrravenhawk.html., “Laurie Cabot Official Website,” fashion-stylist, accessed January 5, 2023,
https://www.lauriecabot.com.
141 “Presenters | WitchsFest USA - A Pagan Faire,” accessed July 5, 2022, http://www.witchsfestusa.org/presenters2/.
80
represented African-heritage religion and was largely taught by white practitioners claiming
some form of acceptance into the Black tradition. Amy Blackthorn, for example, a witch and
Hoodoo practitioner, offers that her practice “isn’t a gimmick, appropriating someone else’s
culture.” She claims she was ‘invited in’” and one of the “proudest moments of her life was
being called, “Sister” by a Gullah chef in Baltimore.” She also lectures on appropriation and was
“told as an apprentice, that it doesn’t matter what other people think of my work.”142
Blackthorn’s reflections on her inclusion into Hoodoo demonstrate the type of excuses white
people often make for cultural appropriation.
Understanding the representation of witchcraft and the learned and assumed traditions in
predominantly white spaces like Witchfest serves as a vital contrast to this study’s representation
of the Black witch, as those spaces and self-perception are not anchored by the Africana religious
orientation so foundational to Black witch ontology. The Black witch’s notions of self is shaped
by ancestral and cultural beliefs and traditions directly related to their innate abilities, including
but not limited to connecting with the dead, knowing and creating herbal remedies to be used for
physical health, and divinely communicating through dreams.
Africana Notions of Innate Power
Because almost all of the Black witches interviewed for this study practice an Africanheritage religion, they develop an Africana religious orientation similar to that of African
Americans in the 19th and early 20th century, when concepts and shared diasporic beliefs
informed perceptions of self. Many of their notions of innate spiritual abilities are common
within the transatlantic African Diaspora. In the Hoodoo sources referenced in Chapter One,
142 “About the Author,” Amy Blackthorn - Author & Psychic (blog), accessed July 5, 2022,
https://amyblackthorn.com/about-the-author/.
81
there are repeated accounts of conjurers or witches mentioning ontological power often
characterized by physical attributes, such as being born with the caul. Because Hoodoo is
primarily derived from pre-colonial Kongo beliefs and practices, as most enslaved Africans in
the United States descended from west-central Africa, a Hoodoo understanding of innate power
likely has some origins in the pre-colonial kingdom of the Kongo.143
Describing kindoki, which is a term to signify power or force in Kongo culture, Simon
Bockie writes,
The usual meaning denotes this power as evil. But it is susceptible to being
exercised in any sense, in a good sense, as well as evil. It is a question of an
ambivalent, ambiguous power, which arouses fear: of a dangerous and good
power, capable of harming but also protecting.144

This power of kindoki and its ability to harm or heal depending on the practitioner is very similar
to African Americans’ concepts of the witch in early 20th century folklore. They, too, believed
that energy was neutral, and that ethics remained in the person instead of the energies
themselves. Bockie also explains that the ndoki is someone with extraordinary abilities or a
person who is exceptionally good at a particular skill, such as an excellent leader or
businessperson. These people “…are ndoki both by their arts and by their uniqueness, which can
only be explained by their having the gift of unusual powers.”145 People who possess this unique
capacity for ndoki and have the guidance of a benevolent spirit or nkisi are referred to as nganga.
According to Wyatt MacGaffy, the term nkisi is also linked “…etymologically to Central
African words often translated as ‘spirit.’ Such a translation captures an important feature of
minkisi [nkisi singular]; they are local habitations and embodiments of personalities from the
143 Mechal Sobel displays a graph of African American African origins in Trabelin’ on: The Slave Journey to an
Afro-Baptist Faith (Princeton, N.J: Princeton University Press, 1988). 24.
144 Simon Bockie, Death and the Invisible Powers: The World of Kongo Belief (Bloomington: Indiana University
Press, 1993). 43.
145 Ibid.
82
land of the dead, through which the powers of such spirits are made available to the living.”146A
nganga (spiritual leader) works with this spirit, employing its power to achieve desired results
while ndoki do not possess this spiritual guide. According to Bockie, the nganga is “a bridge
between the communities of the dead and the living beings.”147 Although every nganga works
closely with the spiritual realm, they possess different skill sets, such as divination or tracking
down evil. Ngang’a mbuki or ngang’a nkisi is the medicine person who cures physical and
spiritual sickness. “He openly uses his nkisi, or spirit, materialized into futu, a small bag
containing several objects more or less whimsical. For nkisi cannot participate in the healing
process without the material support of futu. The indigenous medicine or herb the nganga
prescribes to his patient must have been recommended by nkisi, otherwise, it will do no good.
...the nkisi is the provider, and the nganga is the ‘spirit carrier’ [or] in other words, he is nkisi’s
servant.”148 Bockie provides an example of this relationship between the nganga and the
nkisi/spirit through a conversation he had with a man who was a practicing nganga for many
years. When Bockie asked how he became a nganga, he told him that at around 25 years old, he
“was recommended to heal the sick in a dream.” Bockie asks how he came to know the correct
medicines to use for a specific disease, and the nganga described his innate power saying,
I often dreamed it. My ancestors, chiefly nkaka Nayengika [our grandmother],
were always with me. At night when I was asleep, they not only revealed the
names of the minti [herbs and plants] to use, they also showed me how to use
them. This is the reason why I hardly ever experienced failure in my career. I was
well equipped.”149

146 Wyatt MacGaffey, “The Personhood of Ritual Objects: Kongo “Minkisi” Stitchting Etnofoor 1, no. 3 (1990): 45-
61. https://www.jstor.org/stable/25757709), 56.
147 Simon Bockie, Death and the Invisible Powers: The World of Kongo Belief (Bloomington: Indiana University
Press, 1993). 70.
148 Ibid.
149 Ibid., 70-71.
83
The African American conjurer (or witch) of the early 20th century also possessed innate powers.
They, too, healed people with herbal remedies shown to them in dreams by spirit guides.
In an interview in the Harry Middleton Hyatt’s oral collection on Hoodoo, conjuration,
witchcraft, and rootwork, Hyatt asks a respondent if he was taught about herbal remedies or if he
learned it himself. The conjurer responds, “Naw sir, ah was gifted to date. All ah’m talkin’ about
ah was gifted - took it up mah owns elf. When ah was twelve years old ah was showed [by] de
spirit - diff ‘rent herbs jes’ fer about twelve-thirteen nights, until ah could go to ‘um and tell
dem.” He then gives Hyatt the example of the five-finger grass. “De five-finger grass dat’s one
of de luckiest grasses in de world - jes’ like yore han’. Juh evah seen dat? (No, I never saw it.)
Wall, dat’s in dis country - it’s hard to find without yo’ know dere’s some at. An’ ah kin go to it
right now.” 150 Hyatt’s respondent then explains how he came to know the herb’s location.
It showed me. Den ah went anywhere in de woods to find the same stuff what
ah seed in mah sleep and bring it back to de house and showed de people and de
older people say, “Well, dat [boy] must goin’ be a doctor [or] somepin.” Wall,
then another night ah lay down and them things arrive befo’ me again and ah see
jest little things, but ah go in de woods and ah couldn’t find them. Wall, de,
same thing arrive befo’ me de next night; ah go in de woods an ah keep a huntin’
till ah find that thing - dig it up and carry it back to de house.151
Like in Bockie’s interview with the nganga, this conjurer reports that the herbal remedies appear
to him in dreams brought to him by a spirit guide. In both African American and Central African
beliefs, dreams are an important site of knowledge production. In the Kongo, for example,
dreams are where the spiritual realm communicates with the living. Kongolese scholar
Kimbwandende K.B. Fu-Kiau explains, “A dream is a voiceless communication. It is at the same
time, a means and a message. This message can be audible, pictorial, and scenic. It has an origin
150 Harry Middleton Hyatt, Hoodoo - Conjuration - Witchcraft - Rootwork, Beliefs Accepted By Many Negroes and
White Persons These Being Orally Recorded Among Blacks and Whites, vol. 1, Memoirs of the Alma Egan Hyatt
Foundation (Hannibal, MO: Western Publishing, 1970). 273.
151 Ibid., 273-274.
84
(tutu), a channel (ngongo/n’landa), with or without an addressee receptor (tambudi). The origin
source of the message can be natural, spiritual or supernatural.”152 In the Kongo, dreams are
understood to be either typical ruminations on the day’s events or prophetic, telling the dreamer
of good or bad news. According to Fu-Kiau, “There is a lot to learn through the dream state
(ndozi), about people and their health, about societies and their organizations, about science, the
past, the present and the future of humanity and the world.”153 Among African American
spiritual beliefs, dreams are also a site where the divine communicates with the living.
In the Black Christian tradition of seeking, dreams are an essential component of spiritual
development, a phenomenon LeRhonda S. Manigult-Bryant explores in her ethnographic study
of seven women from the South Carolina Lowcountry. Seeking is a process where young people
venture out into the wilderness to find God and to identify a church in which they will become a
future member. They spend days or weeks in a ritual called tarrying, which consists of fasting,
meditating, and being in solitude to receive a divine message. Ultimately, seekers look for a sign
of God’s acceptance and the message or sign is usually communicated through a dream. For
instance, one of Manigult-Bryant’s respondents shared a dream in which she was standing in a
field of flowers when down came “a stairway from the heavens [and out stretched] a huge brown
hand…I reached up, and it grabbed holda me, you know, and I woke up … [this dream] let me
know I accep’ you, you know, you’re worthy.”154 Manigult-Bryant’s respondent knew she was
accepted by God and ready to join a church based on this divine revelation. Dreams such as these
are then told to a designated elder—sometimes called a spiritual parent—who is not associated
152 Fu-Kiau Kimbwandènde Kia Bunseki, Tying the Spiritual Knot: African Cosmology of the Bântu-Kôngo:
Principles of Life & Living (Brooklyn, NY: Athelia Henrietta Press, 2000), 17.
153 Ibid., 118.
154 LeRhonda S. Manigault-Bryant, Talking to the Dead: Religion, Music, and Lived Memory among GullahGeechee Women (Durham; London: Duke University Press, 2014). 125.
85
with a particular church but identified by the community as someone with the skills and ability to
determine the accuracy of the divine message. If the spiritual parent does not believe that a
seeker is ready, the parent instructs the seeker to continue their quest through the process of
tarrying. Margaret Washington Creel traces this African American ritual to the Sande and Poro
secret societies of Central West Africa, where similarly, seekers would go into the bush and
communicate with the dead and the natural elements. The messages divine forces communicated
were also brought back to a respected elder who determined the accuracy of the information.155

In these processes, dreams are a site where the ancestors communicate to the seeker.
Sometimes the ancestors are relatives, and sometimes they are members of the seeker’s future
church. For example, one respondent, Yenenga, dreamt about her great-great-grandmother and a
St James Presbyterian Church member. She recalled, “One night I dreamt about my great greatgranny who was in conversation with me, and I told that to them (the elders), and they said, ‘oh
yeah.’”156 A few nights later, Yenenga dreamt about another woman she spoke with but could
not identify. Again, the elders confirmed her visions and informed her that this woman was a
member of the Presbyterian Church who passed away before Yenenga’s birth. By
communicating with the dead through dreams, Yenenga received vital information that shaped
her lifelong membership in the St James Presbyterian Church.
In the Kongo and African American traditions, religious practitioners who listen to these
divine messages receive tangible beneficial outcomes. Bockie, for example, shares another story
about a family who had abundant resources due to the father, who was an excellent hunter. This
family had the nicest house in the neighborhood and ate better than anyone around. When the
155 Margaret Washington Creel quoted in LeRhonda S. Manigault-Bryant, Talking to the Dead: Religion, Music, and
Lived Memory among Gullah-Geechee Women (Durham; London: Duke University Press, 2014). 123.
156 LeRhonda S. Manigault-Bryant, Talking to the Dead: Religion, Music, and Lived Memory among GullahGeechee Women (Durham; London: Duke University Press, 2014). 128.
86
father unexpectedly died, his brother took all the riches and left the wife and children in poverty.
In desperation, the sons visited their father’s grave and told him of the tribulations they had
experienced since his death. The father’s spirit then appeared in the eldest son’s dream and
instructed him to quit school and begin working for a white man. He told his son that this was the
only way they could make it out of poverty; this was how he would be able to afford to put his
siblings through school comfortably. The son abided by his father’s guidance and found a job in
the city as a shop owner’s aide. He quickly moved up in the business, and when the shop owner
was forced to flee the country, the eldest son took over the establishment. He grew wealthy and
pledged to care for his entire town.157
Hyatt’s previously mentioned interviewee (who found five-finger grass for luck),
similarly shared that his ability to identify plants through information received in dreams resulted
in upward social and financial mobility. He told Hyatt that after he found the rare herbs, he
would sell them to members of his community. One day a white doctor asked his guardians,
“how old is he? “[They] Said, “He is twelve years old gwine on thirteen. “He said,
“Well, I would like to have this boy wit me. “Wal, ah did not have no mother an’
no father. Ah was jest a motherless child, jes’ like ah am now - ain’t know mah
mother and mah father, be’s a step-baby. But he’s mah step-daddy. So he raised
me.158
Although both of these stories reference wealth generated from affiliation with white men, it is
crucial to remember that these tales were relayed in the early 20th century, when whites were
primarily the exclusive holders of wealth. Both stories convey the importance of listening to the
ancestors and sharing their wisdom with the community. As a result, the respondents
157 Simon Bockie, Death and the Invisible Powers: The World of Kongo Belief (Bloomington: Indiana University
Press, 1993). 112-115.
158 Harry Middleton Hyatt, Hoodoo - Conjuration - Witchcraft - Rootwork, Beliefs Accepted By Many Negroes and
White Persons These Being Orally Recorded Among Blacks and Whites, vol. 1, Memoirs of the Alma Egan Hyatt
Foundation (Hannibal, MO: Western Publishing, 1970). 273-274.
87
experienced personal benefits such as financial wealth and adoption. Receiving material favors
from the divine realm, particularly the ancestors, is a common theological understanding among
African and African diasporic peoples.
In the early 20th century, Van Wing noted that people of the lower Congo “ask the
deceased ancestors for positive favors like a good hunt, a good harvest or fertility. They go to the
graveyard and pour libations reciting prayers such as: ‘Oh father! Oh! Elders come to drink the
salutary wine, increase fertility and human wealth.”159 A better life cannot happen without the
“ancestor’s material and social support.”160 In the Kongo, these ancestors are perceived as mini
gods with the power to impact their descendants’ lives. Bockie observes, “Before death, we are
just ordinary beings with no godlike status. But after death, we find ourselves in the process of
becoming gods’ surrogates, or little gods… Using their powers to improve the welfare of their
living brothers, they become saviors and little gods for their particular relatives. Each ancestor’s
power is limited to his own kanda [family]. Outside his kanda he does not intervene. Because of
their liberating role they deserve people’s respect, prayers, and veneration.161 As Bockie claims,
in the Kongo, these mini-God ancestors choose the nganga to convey healing remedies and
material abundance, but in some African cultures, this ability to connect with the realm of the
dead is a hereditary power, one passed down, such as among Azande witches located in modernday Republic of Sudan, Zaire, and the Central African Republic.
In E. E. Evans-Pritchard’s study of the Azande’s spiritual beliefs, he defines a witch as a
person with innate abilities to heal or harm without the assistance of spells or herbal medicine.162
159 Simon Bockie, Death and the Invisible Powers: The World of Kongo Belief (Bloomington: Indiana University
Press, 1993). 119.
160 Ibid.
161 Ibid., 133.
162 Like African American understandings of the hag, this witch possesses a spirit counterpart that can leave the
body and perform the witch’s wishes. At night it appears as white light, and during the day, this light can only be 
88
The witch possesses an ontological state of being that is both hereditary and something that
manifests as a physical substance in the body typically known to be attached to the liver. The
substance grows with power as the individual ages—a similar association with age and power
that we see among the Yoruba as aje.
163 According to Evans-Pritchard,
Witchcraft is not only a physical trait but also inherited. It is transmitted by
unilinear descent from parent to child. The sons of a male witch are all witches,
but his daughters are not, while the daughters of a female witch are all witches,
but her sons are not.164
By this definition, it would seem all descendants - men or women - in a clan would thus be
witches, but the Azande does not treat everyone as a witch. Someone may have inherited the
witchcraft substance in their body but may choose not to use it, at least not to harm other
community members. Understanding this, Evans-Pritchard concludes, “Azande is interested in
witchcraft only as an agent on definite occasions and in relation to his own interests, and not as a
permanent condition of individuals.”165 For instance, if someone is concerned that another
community member performed malevolent witchcraft on them, they consult an oracle, typically
asking about anyone who holds grudges against them. Similar to the Azande association of
ontological power with the physical substance in the liver, in Namibia, some believe the caul
denotes innate power.
The caul is a sheet of an amniotic membrane that covers the newborn’s face during
childbirth. One respondent told the German researcher Sigrid Schmidt that she had a dream that
seen by other witches or witch-doctors equipped with the appropriate medicine. See E. E. Evans-Pritchard and Eva
Gillies, Witchcraft, Oracles, and Magic among the Azande (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1976). 10-11.
163 Aje a power specific to older women. According to MontreÌ Aza Missouri, aje is "often simultaneous with
witches and granted to menopausal and postmenopausal women ensuring the reverence of older women." See Black
Magic Woman and Narrative Film: Race, Sex and Afro-Religiosity (Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire; New
York, NY: Palgrave Macmillan, 2015). 24.
164 E. E. Evans-Pritchard and Eva Gillies, Witchcraft, Oracles, and Magic among the Azande (Oxford: Clarendon
Press, 1976). 2.
165 Ibid., 4.
89
her grandmother died on a distant farm, and the next day this event occurred. She said, “When I
dream a [bad] dream, this oppresses me much. My mother says I am born in the caul…. When I
was smaller and talked perhaps about an accident, an accident had happened.”166 It is believed
that the caul must be removed correctly by a trained midwife so that the child will continue to
possess the innate abilities associated with its presence. If removed incorrectly, the abilities are
believed to disappear. Once removed, the midwives dry the caul and then feed it to the child.
When these two protocols are followed, the child will begin to show natural abilities early in life.
The caul is also revered in Europe but, there, is seen more as a symbol of luck. For example,
fishers were known to take the caul to sea to ensure safety and a good catch. In contrast,
Namibians believe the appearance of the caul at birth to be associated more with internal versus
external influence; they see it as a sign that the child will be able to see the future, or at least be
highly intelligent.167
Although most African descendants in America did not come from Namibia, there are
still important similarities between Namibian stories of innate power and folklore of the Black
diaspora in the early 20th century.168 For African Americans, too, the caul is seen as an early
prediction of supernatural abilities. Like Namibian accounts, 20th century African American
folklore shows the caul as signifying an ability to foresee the future and communicate with the
spirit realm. So much so, that Hyatt’s collection designates an entire section specifically to
respondents sharing their accounts of being born with the caul. One respondent recalled,
166 Sigrid Schmidt, “Born in the Caul, Born in the Rain: Damara and Nama People with Extrasensory Abilities in
Namibia.,” Southern African Humanities 33, no. 1 (January 1, 2020): 119–33. 120.
167 Ibid.
168 Schmidt notes that his conclusions are based on interviews he conducted beginning in the 1960s with the Damara
and Nama people. Ibid, 119. The people he interviewed likely mixed with Bantu-speaking people whose ancestors
were from the Kingdom of the Kongo. African Americans also have ancestors from Kongo cultures, making it
possible that beliefs about the caul’s power could descend from this region of Africa. See “Namibia - History |
Britannica,” accessed April 20, 2023, https://www.britannica.com/place/Namibia/History; Marion Wallace, History
of Namibia: From the Beginning to 1990 (Oxford University Press, 2014).
90
I was home in the yard one evening just about dusk, and I happened to see an old
lady coming up to the house. I run in the house and told mama I seen aunt Jozrah.
Mama said, “If you don’t stop coming in here and telling me about you seeing
spirits, I’m going to whip you.” My father said, “Don’t whip her. You know she
was born with these spirits.” They tell me when I was born there was a cord [caul]
around my face, it went under my nose and caught over my head and against my
eyes.169
Similar to some Namibians’ belief that there is a specific procedure for removing a caul
to ensure that the child maintains their abilities, Hyatt records a respondent in the US South who
also suggests specific protocol is necessary.
If yo’ evah had a child be bo’ned veiled yo’ take dat veil an’ don’ nevah throw it
off; always take it off farwards, don’t take it off backward. Takes de luck away
from ‘em to take ‘em off this way, jes’ (demonstrates over their head -
forward.)… An’ den yo’ take those veils - yo’ have tuh keep ‘em. Sew ‘em up in
somepin where dey’ll keep ‘em, yo’ know. Co’ se, yo’ may have tuh resew ‘em or
else dey supposed tuh be split heah, an’ put in dere an’ sew it up. Yo’ see [why]
some people be so lucky an’ so successful.170
In another story documented in Drums and Shadows, the caul is similarly associated with
luck in finding treasure while also denoting an ability to see spirits. Nathen Lewis tells the
ethnographers, “I was birthed with my wisdom because I was the seventh child an bawn with a
caul.” The researchers ask Lewis if he can see spirits, to which he responds that he does indeed
see them. He then shares a story about encountering these spirits when searching for treasure in
an old house. When Lewis and two men went out to find the treasure that he intuitively knew
was there, he “…saw three spirits, one man and three women [along with] the pot of money.”171
These spirits frightened Lewis and his crew, preventing him from returning to the money. It is
possible that because Europeans colonized both Namibia and African Americans, that they
169 Harry Middleton Hyatt, Hoodoo - Conjuration - Witchcraft - Rootwork, Beliefs Accepted by Many Negroes and
White Persons These Being Orally Recorded Among Blacks and Whites, vol. 1, Memoirs of the Alma Egan Hyatt
Foundation (Hannibal, MO: Western Publishing, 1970). 26.
170 Ibid., 27.
171 Georgia Writers’ Project, ed., Drums and Shadows: Survival Studies among the Georgia Coastal Negroes
(Athens: University of Georgia Press, 1986). 15.
91
adopted Western beliefs about the caul. Either the caul is originally a European signifier of
innate ability and luck that African and African descendants adopted, or it is also originally
African and modified in its correlation to luck while maintaining an African framework of
prophecy and spirit engagement. Regardless, it still speaks to an Africana orientation where
physical characteristics signify ontological power.
African American conjurers and people of extraordinary gifts were also marked by
defining physical characteristics. Nat Turner, who led the 1831 rebellion against slavery in
Southampton, Virginia County, was known to possess prophetic powers. According to someone
who knew Turner,
Nat was no preacher, but… he had acquired the characters of a prophet. He traced
his divination in characters of blood, on leaves, alone in the woods; he would
arrange them in some conspicuous place… have a dream telling him of the
circumstance…and he would interpret their meaning…. By means of this nature,
he acquired an immense influence over such persons he took into his
confidence.172
In Confessions, Turner himself speaks to these abilities noting, “I had a vision—and I saw white
spirits and black spirits engaged in battle, and the sun was darkened—the thunder rolled in the
Heavens, and blood flowed in streams—and I heard a voice saying, ‘Such is your luck, such you
are called to see, and let it come rough or smooth, you must surely bare it.’”173 Turner’s
divinatory prophetic ability that aided in the most successful slave revolt in American history
was, self-proclaimed to be marked on him at birth. He admits, “I surely would be a prophet, as
the Lord had shewn me things that had happened before my birth. And my father and mother
172
 Yvonne Chireau, Black Magic: Religion and the African American Conjuring Tradition (Berkeley, CA:
University of California Press, 2006). 64.
173 “Nat Turner, 1800-1831. The Confessions of Nat Turner, the Leader of the Late Insurrection in Southampton,
Va.,” accessed July 6, 2022, https://docsouth.unc.edu/neh/turner/turner.html.
92
strengthened me in this first impression, saying in my presence, I was intended for some great
purpose, which they had always thought from certain marks on my head and breast. 174
In Hyatt’s collection, conjurers are also defined by other abnormal physical
characteristics, such as red or blue eyes. One respondent explains, “When you see these old
people and their eyes is red, they’re conjures.” Another woman spoke about her mother, who
went to a rootworker to get a curse removed. “…this woman had blue eyes an’ she was re’l
funny lookin’. She must of been a root woman. She [the mother] said she looked so funny.”175
Interviewees also described conjurers as having exceptionally long beards and wearing large
earrings in both ears. Some were depicted as living in houses far from the general population and
leading relatively solitary lives. Although the Black witches in this study do not explicitly
comment on the physical attributes of the witch or conjurer, the text highlights a crucial factor
when conceptualizing Black witch ontology— she is other, outside of the broader public, with
powers that make her exceptional and extraordinary. Both to be feared and to be loved. She is a
marked woman.
Black Witch, Black Femme Power
In this study, each witch began with stories of finding their power when they were young.
These included tales of dreams coming true, abilities to feel others’ emotions through mere
proximity, or the ability to connect with spirit guides manifested as children’s dolls. In the
Kongo, witches might have been called ndoki, due to her natural power. Among the Yoruba, she
might be considered a woman with the power of aje—an innate ability housed in the pit of her
174 Ibid., Italics mine.
175 Harry Middleton Hyatt, Hoodoo - Conjuration - Witchcraft - Rootwork, Beliefs Accepted By Many Negroes and
White Persons These Being Orally Recorded Among Blacks and Whites, vol. 1, Memoirs of the Alma Egan Hyatt
Foundation (Hannibal, MO: Western Publishing, 1970). 295.
93
belly. And among the Azande, she’d be considered mangu with the choice to do harm or heal, as
she chooses. Here, she is the Black witch— someone not exclusively shaped by the subjectivity
of religion but by the ontology of her intrinsic capacity to connect with the spiritual realm.
I had the privilege of interviewing Daizy October Latifah, a pivotal founder of the Black
witch movement, referenced earlier for her creation of the term Blitch. In Los Angeles, CA,
Daizy offers services in hypnotherapy, rootwork, and astrology at a community healing center.
Through her Facebook group (The Witches Brew: Indigenous Rootwork and Conjure), spiritual
services, her mutual aid fund that supports Black women, and the creation of the term Blitch, she
has redirected an emerging contemporary movement of Black witches toward an Africana
orientation. Daizy began our discussion by telling me about her early connections with spirit.
My first connection with the divine was through the forces of nature. Some of my
earliest memories are being maybe like two or three years old and going outside
on a windy day and being able to see the wind. It looks like oil in water or like
that rainbow that swirls, and it’s like floating through the air. I remember standing
in the direction the wind was coming from and letting it blow on me and hold me
up as I leaned into it. And I could feel myself being cleansed by it. I felt refreshed.
I would also have conversations with the sun and talk to crows as a child. For me,
it is about being able to sense the divine through the forces of nature. It wasn’t
until I was a preteen that I could pick up some of the tools and strategies for
deepening that connection with spirit.176
For Daizy, her power is interconnected with the natural world— something that is profoundly
reflective of an Africana orientation. This reverence for the environment is evident in each
Yoruba orisa’s connection to a particular element, such as Osun being the river or Oya, the wind,
or even in the Kongo and the Southern United States where the simbi spirits become the caves,
trees, and the swamp. In these traditions, the deities or ancestors are not separate from the natural
world—they are it. Osun does not govern the river; she is the river. The simbi do not live in the
176 Daizy Latifah, in discussion with author, October 1, 2021.
94
swamps; they are the swamps, reincarnated from a human self into oneness with the natural
world.177

Daizy descends from a long line of African American Southern rootworkers who
employed their connection with - and use of - the natural world to achieve their desired results.
Her family made the bold decision to pass down their knowledge to future generations resulting
in Daizy and her great grandfather becoming skilled practitioners. She shared,
On my mother’s father’s side, my great-great grandmother Leona was from
Mississippi by way of Alabama and South Carolina. She was a rootworker and a
midwife, which are professions that tend to come together in people’s family
history. She was also responsible for doing a lot of money work for people in the
community. Her husband was a serious gambler, so she knew all about how to
make the hands for gambling, which was a skill that was passed down to her son,
my great grandfather. She was just known for being a very potent person. Things
that she said manifested. Things that she said, don’t do, you knew not to do. From
what I hear, she was very kind. And her energy got passed down to her son, who’s
the spitting image of her. He then married my great-grandmother, who is also
from Mississippi and a good Christian woman, but very clearly, from the things
that are said about her and what I know of meeting her when she was alive, she’s
very much so Obatala’s child—meaning that she was cool as a fan and always
wore white.178 So much so that there was a story going through the neighborhood
that she was born with a white dress on and a broom. She was a very clean energy
type of person. So, the gambling rootworker family married the Obatala and then,
[laughs] you know, made my grandfather, my mother, and then me.179
Most of the Black witches I spoke with had similar stories about family members who were
practitioners of Africana religions or exhibited extraordinary spiritual talents. Curious about
African peoples like the Azande and popular claims regarding the hereditary nature of being a
witch, I asked Daizy if she thought innate abilities were passed down through lineage.
177 Some of these observations are based on ethnographic research but also see Omise’eke Natasha Tinsley, Ezili’s
Mirrors: Imagining Black Queer Genders (Durham: Duke University Press, 2018). 3-30., Ras Michael Brown,
African-Atlantic Cultures and the South Carolina Lowcountry (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2014).
111-115.
178 Note Daizy’s reference to Obatala, a Yoruba orisa, although Daizy is a practitioner of Hoodoo. This crossreferencing of African spirits speaks to the broader Africana religious orientation spreading across Black witch
networks.
179 Daizy Latifah, in discussion with author, October 1, 2021.
95
I think divine gifts are hereditary, but I think about it from the perspective of all
of us as individuals who have descended from a single female African origin. And
therefore, certain people or bloodlines have created systems of connecting to that
divine hereditary power. So, it shows up more in particular people, bloodlines, or
even generations. So, yes, it’s hereditary, but not to the point where if you don’t
have any immediate stories in your ancestral legacy, that doesn’t mean you don’t
carry the connection.180
Soraya, a Haitian-born self-described “black feminist futurist, visual scholar, ancestral
alchemist, witch healer, mama, femme-boi and queer,” shared similar experiences to Daizy’s
both in family lineage and in the innateness to her power. Also, the co-founder of Wildseeds:
New Orleans Octavia Butler Emergent Strategy Collective, Soraya is currently designing tarot
card imagery for a deck based on Butler’s science fiction work. We met on a 95-degree New
Orleans day in a crowded beer garden to discuss her work and spiritual interests. Adorned in
brilliant tattoos, a head wrap, and red lipstick, she shared stories of her divine empathetic
abilities, perceived at a young age. Soraya’s mother told her that even when she was a toddler,
she would always touch people and, after contact, try to give away jewelry to strangers whom
she deemed were in financial need. As Soraya grew, she began noticing her gifts more acutely.
I remember being probably twelve-ish, taking a bus for school, and I wanted to
give this older woman my seat. I held her hand to help her sit down, and when I
did, I felt all her emotions. Then it would happen with family members. Someone
hugged me, and I knew her husband was cheating on her. I wouldn’t say it. But I
would know it. Or I knew someone should get their breast checked for cancer
cells. A part of me didn’t want to feel this because it wasn’t just a knowledge, it
was also the physical expression of whatever I felt. So, if you had a heart issue,
my heart would race. If you had stomach issues, I would feel nauseated.181
Soraya began cultivating her spiritual talents by watching her grandmother, a card reader, and
nurse who “worked at St. Luke’s hospital and on the weekends and when she wasn’t working,
would open up her home with its separate room, full of spiritual tools.” Soraya’s parents were
180 Ibid.
181 Soraya Jean-Louis, in discussion with author, June 28, 2021.
96
Haitian Catholics who very much opposed any spiritual practice that was not Catholicism and
prevented Soraya from explicit training with her grandmother. Although prohibited, Soraya
would sit in her grandmother’s spirit room and just watch her practice— no instruction, just
observation. Soraya continued to cultivate her abilities by working in a botanica (spiritual supply
shop) in Brooklyn, one she’d randomly stopped in for candles after walking down Fulton Street,
thinking to herself that she needed a job.
I went in there, and the owner was like, are you looking for a job? She said, you
know you have sight, right? And I replied that yes, I know. She then asked how
does it show up for you? And I explained my experiences. She said, “If you want
a job, you can have it. But the only thing I really want you to focus on is just
dressing candles. I don’t want you touching people. Cause I think you’re so
young, and you need mentorship. And then she invited me to be part of her ile [Ifá
or Lucumí temple], but I didn’t want to do that. I worked there for like a year,
dressing candles, talking to people, learning, reading the materials, and watching
what was important to the elders in their spiritual practice.182
In New Orleans, I also spoke with LaReina, a widely renowned burlesque dancer in her late 20s,
currently investing in her business, Queenly Conjure, which sells divine teas, bath bombs, baked
goods, and oils.
At Queenly Conjure, each product has a physical purpose, such as teas to alleviate
inflammation, but also spiritual uses - like oils used in rituals to manifest a desired result.
Alongside her business, LaReina works at one of the few Black-owned Hoodoo shops in New
Orleans, Crescent City Conjure, where she attends to the shop’s daily functions. I initially met up
with LaReina at a Juneteenth event organized by Crescent City Conjure, where drumming, tarot
readings, and vendors selling spiritually effective crystals were met with discussions of Black
pride and ancestral reverence. I asked LaReina when she discovered her divine abilities and
referred to her power as divine ‘gifts’ to which she responded as follows:
182 Ibid.
97
I don’t think I thought of it as a gift. It was just who I was ever since I was a
child. I was the child that people would say don’t talk too much to her. She knows
things, and she talks too much.
I had an aunt to whom I was really close. And when I was about like four or five,
she passed away. Because everyone thought I was a weird child, I was not
allowed to attend the funeral. My family also tried to keep young children away
from death because you’re a new spirit coming in. They want to ensure that
you’re protected from older spirits lingering in those places that could feed on
you. At dinner one evening, when everybody was quietly eating, I spout out, “my
auntie, she’s in the ground, she’s in the ground like this. [LaReina demonstrates
someone with their eyes closed and arms crossed over their chest.] And I had
never seen anything like that. Nobody showed me any movies or TV shows or
anything like that about death. But I just knew that. And then a couple of days
later, we drove around and passed by so many different cemeteries, but the one
where she was, I pointed and said, my auntie, is right there. …So yeah, it never
really seemed like a gift. It just seemed like this is just how I live. How to live.183
LaReina disclosed that her mom is also spiritual and a practitioner of the Yoruba religion
of Ifá. She said that sometimes she and her mother are in sync with their spiritual visions.
She [LaReina’s mother] went to the Dominican Republic to work with an
orphanage and do religious initiatory work. On the same day, I was walking with
a friend in Humboldt, Northern California, where there weren’t many brown
people. We came across a group of people doing this fire ceremony ritual, and I
instantly got mounted. My friend said I got really angry and started storming off,
so she just took me somewhere safe until the spirit left. She also said my eyes
were completely black. The following day I called my mom, who told me that
while I was mounted, she got mounted too, and people said that she flipped tables
over and was cursing. We later discovered that the orphanage was bringing people
from spiritual communities in the States and taking their money without giving
any of it to the children. Hence the anger.184
Unfortunately, with the rise of Christianity and subsequent demonization of innate spiritual
power, numerous Black women and femmes who are beginning to tap into their abilities do not
have mothers like LaReina’s to help guide them. Instead, they seek out books and conferences on
African-heritage religions, hoping to find mentorship.
183 LaReina, In discussion with author, June 28, 2021.
184 Ibid.
98
At the First Annual Detroit Hoodoo Festival in April 2021, Black women and femme
audience members sought information on cultivating intuitive ways of knowing. At this
conference, Mary Byrd, aka the Queen of Swords—a Black woman in her 50s adorned in purple
(the color of personal power), an African print skirt, short deep purple hair, and a tee-shirt that
read “I do Witch Shit”—facilitated a workshop on witchcraft and depression. The around 30
young Black women and femmes attending Mary’s workshop were moderately interested in how
witchcraft can help heal depression, but what was most captivating was a conversation about
personal power. One attendee shared a story about her relationship with a spirit.
I believe I am somewhat of a seer like I can see spirits… As a kid, since about
eight years old, I would always have these dizzy fainting spells. And over the
years no doctors could figure out what was happening. I was told that a spirit was
riding me or something like that. This spirit could be hovering, walking toward
me, or standing in the doorway. And I’m trying to figure out how to tap into that,
to get more clarity on who or what it is, cause, in the sleep paralysis stage right
now, it’s almost like I wake up fearful because I can’t move. And I’m so focused
on not being able to move that I can’t focus on the energy. Once I wake, I miss
my moment to try to harness that power.185
Mary first responded to the young woman’s question by explaining the differences between
types of extra-sensorial abilities—or the clairs.
Clairaudience means that you hear something like a voice or a ringing in your ear,
and you turn around, and there’s nothing physically there. So, you figure what
you’re hearing is from the other side or another realm of reality, not on this plane.
The same thing with feeling. You may feel one of your ancestors in the room. My
father passed away three years ago. And I would feel him there. Sometimes I
would see the indentation on the end of the bed where he was sitting, but I didn’t
physically see him. Clairalience means smelling aromas that are not there. For
instance, my dad always smoked cigarettes. I don’t smoke. I would come home
and smell smoke. So, I’m like, dad, did you not die and didn’t tell me, or...what’s
going on? Clairsentience is when you feel like somebody is in the room, but you
look around, and that person is not there. Like when you get tingles down your
spine, your hair stands up on your arms or something like that.186
185 Anonymous, In discussion with author, April 16, 2021.
186 Mary Byrd, In discussion with author, April 16, 2021.
99
She further advised that the young woman seek divination to inquire what that particular spirit
wanted from her. Mary also affirmed that this woman had the power of clairvoyance, the ability
to see the dead, and must find a mentor to help her develop her innate skills. In this brief
exchange, Mary, an older, established witch, helped a younger generation of primarily Black
women tap into their ontological divine power, an ability that, if not cultivated, could potentially
wither away or cause harm to the subject. Mentorship in the cultivation of self is crucial for the
Black witch.
In my interviews, I not only heard people discuss this ontological power of seeing or
smelling spirits, but I experienced it in my interview with esteemed Black witch Rebeca Spirit.
Although Rebeca lives in upstate New York, she was in New Orleans visiting another respected
witch Lilith Dorsey, for initiation into the religion of Voodoo. I sat with Rebeca expecting a
typical interview where we would intellectually discuss our connection to spirit. What I
experienced was something very different. I began by asking what it means to heal the
ancestors—a common topic among my respondents. What follows is our dialogue.
Rebeca: Two things are happening. One, your people are trying to come through.
And two, a spirit that I channeled was trying to come through. Your maternal
grandmother is passed. Did she have an accent?
Marcelitte: Maybe. I didn’t know her. She might have had a Creole patois accent.
Rebeca: And she was shorter?
Marcelitte: Probably. She was a light skin Black woman with red hair.
Rebeca: But you favor more the paternal side. Cause she’s going, “she didn’t look
nothing like me.” Was there a struggle between her and your mom, like a division
where they stopped talking for a couple of years or weren’t as close?
Marcelitte: My mom has never said that. My grandmother died when my mom
was in her early 20s. 
100
Rebeca: It might be a sense of abandonment from your mom—feeling like her
mom left her here. I would bet a hundred bucks they had an issue where they
stopped talking for a while.
So, to your question about healing the ancestors—keep asking your mom
questions. How did you and grandma do? What did you learn from her? What did
she teach you? Pulling those threads is what heals the ancestors and elevates them
into a space of immortality. Because then we keep calling on them. We ask for
their help. We go to them for these things. The relationship between you and your
mom heals those other relationships too. And the work you do in changing some
of the spaces where you and your mom don’t agree helps what will happen for
you and your children. You’re breaking the generational curses. Now, that doesn’t
mean that you must agree with everything she says and go to her house for
thanksgiving and everything else and call her every day. That’s not what that’s
about. You don’t even actually have to talk to her to do the work and continue
healing generational timelines. It’s really about seeing the disconnect and doing
the healing work within. The magic in say, writing her a letter and burning it so
that her spirit hears and feels it. It then becomes released.187
Tears were shed in this exchange as I reflected on my relationship with my mother and as I, too,
felt the ancestors surrounding us.
Rebeca’s abilities of mediumship also came to her at a young age. For years she would
talk to spirit dolls who spoke back to her, communicating all kinds of practical advice for
Rebeca’s young life. Rebeca became ashamed of her abilities as she grew and actively worked
on suppressing them. But by her teenage years, she had no choice after visiting a graveyard with
her friends and becoming overwhelmed with voices from the spirit realm. Since then, Rebeca has
committed to her calling as a Black witch.
Rebeca, Daizy, Soraya, LaReina, and Mary all have power and abilities that make them
unique and distinct from white Christian normative understandings of personhood. They define
themselves through and within an innate, often shared, and/or inherited Black femme power. The
187 Rebeca Spirit, In discussion with author, June 28, 2021.
101
presence of their inherent powers—like mediumship— not only informs a unique ontology but
also defines a self that, when immersed in patriarchal rule, opposes its dominance.
Claiming the Monstrosity
Intrinsic power is not only understood by Black witches in conjunction with an Africana
religious orientation—due to their religious practices but also in tandem with a Black feminist
framework. Like broader witch movements, Black witches fathom the witch as a figure who
opposes patriarchy but do so through a Black feminist analysis invested in resisting both
patriarchy and anti-Blackness. The Black witch integrates Black feminist analysis into her
notions of self by adopting an identity that is non-normative, outside of, and intentionally
opposed to white Western Christian supremacy. She claims an expression of sexuality
categorized by whiteness as the jezebel, religious traditions marked as heathen, and a power to
materialize another world not inclined toward dominance. She claims the monstrous.
Black witch and Hoodoo practitioner Zoë Flowers captures an ontology of the nonnormative exquisitely in her poem “In Praise of The Wytch.”
We are immortal. Reincarnated in the poems of our daughters. We are phoenix.
Eyes in the back of our head. We are Sankofa bird. Live betwixt worlds. Float
through walls that you build around us. Blowing cigar smoke in your face. We are
juke joint. Speak out both sides of our mouth; see your future in eggshells-it’s not
looking good for you. Familiars at our side. We tag Miami, Haiti, and Nawlins
with chalk circles, drink with Legba at the crossroads.
…
Black cat crossing your path. That poem you wish you smart enough to write. The
rhyme you are too afraid to spit. Fucking up the mood. We are the ejaculation that
comes too quickly. Gas on a crowded elevator. The uninvited party guest flirting
with your boyfriend and eating all your food. An inconvenient truth. We are the
shoes you can’t afford to buy. That thing you hate but can’t let go. Those pants
that are too tight around your waist now. The song that keeps playing in your
head. That chic you know you’re not good enough to bang. The one your mama 
102
warned you about. We are trouble. Urban sprawl haunting your daydreams. We
are muse; inspire you to get your game up, teaching by example. We are Root
Worker, Obeah Lady, and Conjure Womyn. The scary broad living at the end of
the road alone. Glamouring you through forked tongue. We make miracles. And
yes, mothafucka we DO Ride on Brooms. You should be afraid of Womyn like
us. Chastity belted, we fuck anyway. We do what we want to do. Walk butt naked
in the daytime. And come to you at night.188
To Flowers, the Black witch is othered, outside of and in opposition to normative notions of
womanhood. And still, she is very Black, very oriented toward her Africana spirituality, noted
through the reference to the Haitian and New Orleans Papa Legba, the Jamaican Obeah woman,
and the African American Rootworker. While her ontology directly resists white supremacist
capitalist patriarchy (unlike James Cone’s definition of an ontological Blackness that is innately
about resistance and thus, at least theoretically, depends on whiteness for its existence), the
Black witch’s powers live outside of whiteness. She existed before by other names such as ndoki
in the pre-colonial Kongo or Iyami aje in Yorubaland. But when violently placed within AngloAmerican Puritan value-based norms, she, by her very being, resists.
According to Black witch Soraya, “Just saying the word Black witch, is like saying ‘get
thee back white supremacist, patriarchal, capitalistic demon. Get thee back.’”189 Expert Hoodoo
practitioner, priestess of Oya, and Black witch Mawiyah Kai EL-Jamah Bomani shares a similar
refrain: “By saying that I’m a witch. It’s like saying, you know, fu*k the society, fu*k the
system. It’s my liberation. It’s a woman who owns her power. That evokes fear in many men and
the women who side with them. And they should be afraid of somebody who is saying that I’m
reclaiming me and not allowing you to define me.”190 In this same vein, Daizy’s definition of
Blitch connects this Black feminist analysis to an Africana orientation by noting the combination
188 Zoe Flowers, In Praise of The Wytch. (S.L.: Balboa Press, 2021). 67.
189 Soraya Jean-Louis, in discussion with author, June 28, 2021.
190 Mawiyah Kai EL-Jamah Bomani, in discussion with author, June 12, 2021.
103
of “African thought, African/Afrodiasporic spiritual practice” with the social justice aim of
healing and fortifying themselves and future generations.191 All of the Black witches interviewed
in this study defined the Black witch as someone with power that is innately opposed to
patriarchal rule.
White Neopagan movements have also identified the embodiment and concept of the
witch as one with a power that opposes patriarchal supremacy, constructing a subject that exists
outside normative standards of womanhood. This association began in the 1950s with the
founding of modern witchcraft by Gerald Gardner, who started what we now know today as
Wicca. As second-wave feminism was rising in the 1960s, many white feminists took an interest
in witchcraft as an alternative to patriarchal Christian traditions. Witchcraft offered the worship
of female goddesses alongside male gods. Women could be initiated and become priestesses, and
covens organized themselves non-hierarchically. In 1979, one of the first explicitly feminist
covens, Reclaiming, was established in San Francisco by longtime feminist and ecological rights
activists Starhawk.
Popular in the 1980s to mid-90s, the Reclaiming witches combined activism, feminism,
and an anarchist analysis and social structure with an earth-based spiritual belief system. Their
goal was to dismantle and break away from sexed divisions of power and labor such as parenting
and marriage, as well as inequality in the workforce - systems that keep women in subservient
roles. Instead, they sought to reclaim agency in both domestic and public spheres and to regard
reproductive capacities as life-affirming and sacred. The term witch then became the chosen term
191 Daizy Latifah, “BLITCH,” The AfroMystic, accessed January 20, 2022, http://www.theafromystic.com/blitch.
104
to denote such power, as well as deviance from patriarchal normative standards.192 Starhawk
writes,
The word “Witch” carries so many negative connotations that many people
wonder why we use the word at all. Yet to reclaim the word “Witch” is to reclaim
our right, as women, to be powerful as men to know the feminine within as
divine. To be a Witch is to identify with 9 million victims of bigotry and hatred
and to take responsibility for shaping a world in which prejudice claims no more
victims. 193
This movement and reclaiming of the term witch as one of feminist power was crucial for
shaping the current generation of witches across racial backgrounds, including Black witches.194
Because culture does not emerge in isolation, it is likely that the Black witches
interviewed in this study had connections to white witch frameworks of feminist and spiritual
analysis. Lilith Dorsey, for example, is a renowned Black witch who continues to organize with
white feminist Wiccan and Neopagan communities.195 But Black witch ontology and white witch
ontology are very different. Black feminists like Audre Lorde and bell hooks argued in the 1980s
that Black women’s experience of gendered oppression was racialized in ways that white
women, not only did not experience but, often perpetuated. Additionally, the choice to identify
with feminist deviance has drastically different implications for Black women than for white
women in the afterlife of slavery.
Black women and femmes have always been defined as deviant and thus outside of white
femininity—stereotyped as hypersexual, bestial, and not human. In “Carceral Constructions of
192 Jone Salomonsen, Enchanted Feminism: Ritual, Gender and Divinity among the Reclaiming Witches of San
Francisco, Religion and Gender (London; New York: Routledge, 2002). 3-37.
193 Starhawk quoted in Jone Salomonsen, Enchanted Feminism: Ritual, Gender and Divinity among the Reclaiming
Witches of San Francisco, Religion and Gender (London; New York: Routledge, 2002). 75.
194 Initially released in 1979, Starhawk’s book The Spiral Dance: A Rebirth of the Ancient Religion of the Great
Goddess, was a best seller that significantly impacted Neopagan movements. A second edition came out in 1989 and
a third in 1999. See Starhawk, The Spiral Dance: A Rebirth of the Ancient Religion of the Great Goddess, 1st ed
(San Francisco: Harper & Row, 1979).
195 Based on conservations with Lilith Dorsey.
105
Black Female Deviance,” Sarah Haley analyses the racialized disparities in two cases of criminal
accusations in the early 20th century. She first presents the case of African American Eliza Cobb,
who was accused of killing her newborn child after giving birth in a shed. Cobb was sentenced to
the grueling labor of cutting down trees among mostly male inmates, one of whom likely raped
her. This violence took such a toll on Cobb’s body that she suffered a major face burn and a
growth on her neck. As such, the authorities deemed her unable to work, and some favored
reducing her sentence. A photograph in which Cobb is garbed in a striped inmate uniform, with a
noticeable burn, and positioned against the jail cell was circulated to promote the idea that Cobb
was deviant, ugly, and ignorant. One official noted she was “very badly burnt about the face”
and “her mind was not as strong as the average negro’s.”196 These attributed characteristics
contributed to her initial conviction and were used by her advocates to construct a palatable
racialized subject. In contrast, Haley presents the case of Martha Gault, a young white woman
who was accused of assault with intent to murder and sentenced to five years in prison. Like
Cobb, a picture circulated, but in this one, Gault was smiling, holding a pet dog, and wearing a
lovely dress. There are no visual cues of incarceration or deviance depicted in this photo.
Quickly authorities revisited her case and argued that she was “of a very modest and refined
nature” and, with a bit of training, would make “a splendid woman and good citizen.”197 The
stark contrast between how this Black woman, Eliza Cobb, and white woman Martha Gault were
treated led Haley to conclude,
In the white imaginary, “black woman” was an oxymoronic formulation because
the modifier “black” rejected everything associated with the universal “woman.”
The black fe-male subject occupied a paradoxical, embattled, and fraught
position, a productive negation that produced normativity. She was an invention
196 Sarah Haley, “Carceral Constructions of Black Female Deviance,” in No Mercy Here (University of North
Carolina Press, 2016), https://doi.org/10.5149/northcarolina/9781469627595.003.0001. 19.
197 Quoted in Ibid., 22.
106
of a white supremacist imaginary defined in part by subjection to extreme
violence and terror.198
In other words, the Black woman was necessary for the pinnacle of white femininity to exist.
White femininity necessitated the ugly other to measure its supposed pristine nature.
Hortense Spillers’ theorization of the Black female body also helps contextualize
differences between white and Black witches. Spillers argues that under chattel slavery, Black
people were stripped of gender altogether—a process she refers to as ungendering. Ungendering
is due to the objectification, the ‘thingness’ of Black people under slavery leading Spillers to
differentiate between the flesh and body. She describes the body as possessing personhood and
humanity, which was left on the shores of Africa, while flesh becomes the object to be owned,
ruptured, and sexually exploited under chattel slavery. Spillers claims that in the crossing of the
Atlantic, enslaved Africans became object/flesh, and thus without gender —being that gender
would demark a sense of personhood. She points to the lack of gendered description in the slave
logs, noting that instead of subjects, they become an object—merely undifferentiated items. She
further highlights the inability of the gendering categories of mother and father to exist as the
enslaved held no rights to ownership over their children. Because the master owned them,
motherhood or fatherhood was an impossibility in the parental capacity.
By both Spillers and Haley’s definitions, Black and woman are terms that contradict each
other. The Black woman was stripped of womanhood during the trans-Atlantic slave trade,
marked as an object, and characterized as deviant, ugly, and the opposite of white femininity in
order to perpetuate enslaved labor and subsequently post-emancipation prison labor. Spillers
concludes, however, with the proposal that in this liminal space of ungendering, the Black
198 Sarah Haley, “Carceral Constructions of Black Female Deviance,” in No Mercy Here (University of North
Carolina Press, 2016), https://doi.org/10.5149/northcarolina/9781469627595.003.0001. 21.
107
woman can define herself anew—outside of the confines of white patriarchal definitions of
subservient womanhood. She suggests,
This problematizing of gender places her, in my view, out of traditional symbolics
of female gender, and it is our task to make a place for this different social
subject. In doing so, we are less interested in joining the ranks of gendered
femaleness than gaining the insurgent ground as female social subject. Actually,
claiming the monstrosity (of a female with the potential to “name”), which her
culture imposes in blindness, “Sapphire” might rewrite after all a radically
different text for female empowerment.199
Spillers begins the article by identifying “Sapphire” as a “marked woman, but not everyone
knows my name.”200 In this ending, she offers a way out of the violence of the ungendered object
by proposing that this Sapphire can do the work of naming herself by claiming the monstrosity.
It is the claiming of the monstrosity, the ugly, the othered that Black witches like Zoë
Flowers do when they identify with, as she puts it, the “trouble, urban sprawl haunting your
daydreams. [The] Root Worker, Obeah Lady and Conjure Womyn, the scary broad living at the
end of the road alone.”201 The Black witch is the ontological embodiment of the rewriting of “a
radically different text.”202 She has always been here—even when marked as flesh—but here and
now, she gets to define herself as someone with a power unentangled from the white supremacist
state and gendered and/or racialized chains. She can claim the monstrosity that they called Black
and the monstrosity that they called a witch and situate herself as a threat to, as bell hooks would
say, white supremacist, capitalist patriarchy.203
199 Hortense J. Spillers, “Mama’s Baby, Papa’s Maybe: An American Grammar Book,” Diacritics 17, no. 2 (1987):
65–81, https://doi.org/10.2307/464747. 80.
200 Ibid., 66
201 Zoe Flowers, In Praise of The Wytch. (S.L.: Balboa Press, 2021). 67.
202 Hortense J. Spillers, “Mama’s Baby, Papa’s Maybe: An American Grammar Book,” Diacritics 17, no. 2 (1987):
65–81, https://doi.org/10.2307/464747. 80.
203 bell hooks, The Will to Change: Men, Masculinity, and Love, 1. paperback edition (New York London Toronto
Sydney: Washington Square Press, 2005).
108
When Omise’eke Natasha Tinsley explores the Haitian Vodou Lwa, like Flowers, she
too, encourages readers to love the parts of oneself deemed unlovable or ugly within the white
Western imagination. In Ezili’s Mirrors, Tinsley theorizes Black queer genders through the lens
of the Lwa. She examines the gender expression of a Black cis-femme dominatrix named
Domina Erzulie through the Lwa Ezili Je Wouj. Ezili Je Wouj is the red-eyed Lwa that is
dangerous, quick to anger, and seeks justice for her children, characteristics similar to the
governing force behind Domina Erzulie’s practice of ‘BDSM.’ Affluent white men pay Domina
Erzulie to inflict pain on them, humiliate, and top.204 She delights in “leaving light red marks
across his white flesh.”205 Hers is a scene of race play. It is a space where a pause is placed on
the power dynamics outside, where white cis men can be punished for their guilty sins by the
Black woman. Like Je Wouj, it is, if only momentary, an act of vengeance, role reversal, and in
some form, justice. It is an enactment of a “cosmic tantrum…Not the tantrum of the spoiled
child, but of some cosmic innocence that cannot understand - and will not understand - why
accident would ever befall what is cherished, or why death should ever come to the beloved.”206
It is not just BDSM as traditionally understood, but a version that seeks social justice, a cosmic
tantrum, red-eyes, an anger that Tinsley claims is the epistemology of Je Wouj.207 She is nasty,
freaky, and divine. She jolts you out of an oppressive haze to “bring you into ‘consciousness of
other realms.’ Realms where the Black woman transforms pain into her own uses, power, and
pleasure.”208 By performing this rage, Domina Erzulie embodies a spiritual identity that is not
separate from her ontology. Je Wouj is the expression of Domina Erzulie’s rage. Domina Erzulie
204 Topping refers to the person taking control or dominating the sexual acts as opposed to the submissive role.
205 Omise’eke Natasha Tinsley, Ezili’s Mirrors: Imagining Black Queer Genders (Durham: Duke University Press,
2018). 117.
206 Ibid., 60.
207 Ibid.,102.
208 Ibid., 103.
109
is Je Wouj and Je Wouj is monstrous. Tinsley then invites the reader to step into Je Wouj’s
power.
…maybe you’ve come in search of Je Wouj: the lwa who exists to take care of all
of those parts of you because they’re parts of her, all aspects of her cosmic force,
all reclamations of the edges of our bodies and psyches we’ve been taught to be
ashamed of but that fuel her red fire. Well, if that’s what you want then go on and
get it, girl! Go on and get what you need from the red power femme and know
you deserve it, all of it.209
A significant part of reclaiming the Black witch is in loving oneself fully. Loving the ugly,
monstrous parts of ourselves that Tinsley so beautifully highlights in her discussion of Je Wouj.
Black witches’ express self through reclaiming their ontological power, such as mediumship or
clairvoyance, which then translates to a broader love of all parts of oneself deemed inappropriate
for traditional white womanhood.
Tinsley’s association of the monstrous with vibrant expressions of sexuality and anger are
also some of the avenues through which Black witches’ express self-love. LaReina and Laurita,
for example, are both burlesque dancers in New Orleans and see a strong correlation between
their sensual expression and spiritual power. LaReina reflected on her burlesque work, noting,
This divine feminine power is what you’re feeding your crowd, and as you feed
them, they reciprocate that energy. It’s powerful being connected to your
sensuality, how your body moves, and how it works. It’s also a reflection of
healing and developing a sense of self-love and confidence. When on stage,
you’re sharing that with the world to see.
There was one show where I didn’t feel ready to perform, but I reached out to my
divine self and said, “I’m honoring you in this way. And I’m allowing this time to
be a moment of spirit. I’m not caring about money or applause.” And I remember
performing and just allowing that divine energy to come through and send it out.
And it was just such a beautiful moment. The audience loved it and threw down
lots of money, which was nice to see, but it was also more beautiful to really vibe
in that sensual, beautiful inward spirit.210
209 Ibid., 126.
210 LaReina Besant, In discussion with author, June 28, 2021.
110
For LaReina, at the moment in question, being on stage was less about other people’s approval
and more about tapping into her divinity, her power, which is very much intertwined with her
sensuality. This is no insignificant endeavor in a world where Blackness has been defined as
paradoxical to femininity; Black expressions of sexuality are painted as adverse to respectable
Christian womanhood; and divine ontological power, or the witch, is ugly, othered, and
inherently threatening to patriarchal rule. LaReina’s love for her beautiful, Black, sensual, and
divine self—a self who possesses the innate power of one who “knows things” and “talks too
much”—is an ontological expression of defiance. Unlike white witches who expressed their
defiance through labor redistribution and the worship of the Goddess, LaReina and other Black
witches like her are defining their power through a Black feminist lens—one where Blackness,
an Africana orientation, and ontological power culminate in a claiming of the monstrosity.
Conclusion
Although Black ontology is a contested area in the field of Black studies, theologians like
James Cone and Emilie Townes did important work in identifying how external forms of
oppression shape the subject. However, I offer that, perhaps, resistance to white supremacy
shapes a subjective experience, not an ontological one. While the Black witch opposes white
Christian normative notions of identity, her ontology is not exclusively informed by antiBlackness. Instead, it is an ontology of innate power that exists with or without white supremacy,
such as Soraya’s ability to know personal information about someone merely through touch, or
Rebeca’s ability to channel the dead. As LaReina said, it’s not a gift but “just how I live. How to
live.”211 Furthermore, because the Black witch practices African-heritage religions like Ifá,
Vodou, or Hoodoo, she embraces an Africana religious orientation that is also profoundly
211 Ibid.
111
embedded in an ontological experience of innate power, reinforcing – ancestrally – her own
contemporary self-knowledge, with her notions of the self, reflecting Africana concepts such as
the ndoki or the conjurer born with the caul. But these Africana religions do not define the Black
witch; they are used as structures and containers for her already innate ability. In this way, the
Black witch’s sense of self is both inherently defiant of white supremacy simply in her existence,
and, yet, not dependent on oppression and manufactured oppositional identities to exist. Due to
her Black feminist consciousness, she claims the parts of herself that oppose this supposed
supremacy, such as expressions of sexuality, her religious traditions, and abilities like
clairvoyance that are demonized under a Christian state. She claims herself as monstrosity,
rewriting a radically different text for female empowerment, one owning “the edges of our
bodies and psyches we’ve been taught to be ashamed of,”212 defining a self that is ontologically
powerful, very Black, and rooted in her Black feminist Africana religious orientation. As
addressed in the next chapter, this Africana Black feminist orientation not only defines notions of
self, but shapes community thought and community formation in ways that descend and depart
from a long line of Black religiopolitical movements.
212 Omise’eke Natasha Tinsley, Ezili’s Mirrors: Imagining Black Queer Genders (Durham: Duke University Press,
2018). 117.
Chapter Three:
A Discourse for Us All:
Religiopolitical Thought in Community
A Black feminist Africana religious orientation is readily apparent in Black witch
community spaces and within typical Black witch discourse. Although not formally
institutionalized, Black witches’ emerging temporal spaces frequently look like conferences
meetings, social media groups, and celebratory gatherings such as the Facebook group The
Witches Brew: Indigenous Rootwork and Conjure and Dawtas of the Moon: Black Witch
Convention. Black witches and their emerging community spaces demonstrate a profound
commitment to Black power and self-determination through elements of Black feminism, queer
thought, Black separatism, and multi-religiosity. However, unlike secular movements affiliated
with radical modes of thinking, the Black witch primarily understands Black power to be a
theological endeavor, one required of her by her spiritual guides.
Black witches come to Black space and religiopolitical thought through a long history of
Black religious nationalism. Within Black nationalism, “adherents are united neither by common
geography nor by a common language, but by the nebulous concept of racial unity attempting to
unite the entire Black racial family, assuming that the entire race has a collective destiny.”213
Similarly, Black religious nationalism unites through a common religious or spiritual belief
system. Black spaces like praise houses, churches, mosques, and the culturally Yoruba ile serve
as environments where political thought deeply entrenched in theology comes into fruition.
Black religious spaces also permit experimentation to integrate elements like Hoodoo into
213 Tracey E. Hucks, Yoruba Traditions & African American Religious Nationalism, Religions of the Americas
Series (Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press, 2014). 139.
113
Christianity, sacralize Blackness by preaching Black divinity, and - most importantly - allow
Blackness to simply be instead of being predicated on anti-Blackness.214 Alongside Black
community spaces emerge ideological commitments to Black liberation, such as Black
separatism and Black economic and social power. In movements like the Black Christian
nationalism of the late 19th century, Black Islamic nationalism of the mid-20th century, and more
recently, Yoruba religious nationalism, a theological undercurrent shapes how members
understand individual and community empowerment and the methods by which said power
should be harnessed. Similarly, for Black witches, the religious and the political are inseparable
from commitments informed by Black religious nationalism. The correlation is often direct – for
instance, many respondents are affiliated with Black religious nationalist groups like The United
Nation of Ifá-Orisa-Vodun. Although there are derivative elements of Black religious
nationalism in Black witches’ religious orientation, they depart from some of its notions. Black
witches alternatively possess a West and West-Central African theological framework and a
Black feminist consciousness that prioritizes the needs of women, queer and trans people,
ultimately producing a new religiopolitical discourse in the context of Black religion. To
comprehend how Black religious nationalist ideas inform Black witch thought, it is crucial first
to examine the rise and proliferation of key movements associated with Black religious
nationalism.
214 Religious studies scholar Dianne Stewart has highlighted the construction of the sacrality of Blackness within
Black religious nationalism in class lectures. Dianne M. Stewart, “Black Love” (Lecture, Emory University, Spring
2019).
Kevin Everod Quashie discusses blackness as being instead of being predicated on anti-Blackness in Black
Aliveness, or a Poetics of Being, Black Outdoors: Innovations in the Poetics of Study (Durham: Duke University
Press, 2021).
114
Black Religious Nationalism in the United States
Black religion in the Americas has always been political. As soon as captive Africans
arrived on foreign shores, they began using the spiritual technologies they remembered such as
poisoning the enslaver or engaging local pharmacology to heal themselves in the absence of
medical support. People gathered to learn spiritual skills, venerate ancestors, and rejoice in
community, but due to white plantation oversight, there were no formalized spaces where Black
religion could develop without the white gaze and subsequent violence. Under the cloak of
Christianity, enslaved Africans created spaces that provided minimal safety, such as praise
houses, which were the first known built institutions of African American religious autonomy.
They were often small plantation buildings, sometimes slave quarters, where Blacks gathered to
worship, dance, hold meetings and plot slave revolts. The praise house functioned as a home
where enslaved people could resolve community disagreements and as a place for momentous
occasions such as baptisms, weddings, or funerals. The praise house was also a space where
Blacks could integrate elements of the African-derived religion of Hoodoo with their emerging
exposure to Christianity.215
The first institutionally recognized Black churches in the United States took formation in
the late 18th century. Of course, they were not immune to the sociopolitical struggles affecting
the country at large. Some churches were initially mixed congregations that eventually split
along racial lines, like The Gillfield Baptist Church of Petersburg, Virginia, which became
exclusively Black in 1810 with 270 Black members. Others were established as solely African
215 It was an emerging exposure because, as many historians have noted, African Americans (outside some of Kongo
heritage) were not typically exposed to Christianity until the First Great Awakening in 1740 when Christian
missionaries sought the proselytize the South, and even then, Blacks were not widely converted until the mid-19th
century. Thus, we see practices like the ring-shout as a frequent form of worship in the praise house. Hoodoo
historian Katrina Hazzard-Donald claims that the ring-shout was the official dance of the Hoodoo religion and links
its counterclockwise motion to the precolonial kingdom of the Kongo. The Kongo people developed a cosmogram,
which in a counterclockwise circular motion maps the four moments of life and death.
115
American from their founding. The first Black church was formally recognized (between 1773
and 1775) in Silver Bluff, South Carolina. Originally founded by a white preacher and seven
enslaved members, the church soon moved to all Black leadership, as white preachers were no
longer allowed to lead Black congregations for fear that they would spread too much knowledge
among the enslaved during the American Civil War. In the white minister’s absence, member
David George took leadership, moved the church to Augusta, Georgia, and renamed it the First
African Baptist Church. In later years, white Baptist leadership enacted laws aimed at
dismembering it and Black institutions like it. Still, Black churches continued to emerge despite
racist pushback.216
Because an exclusively Black religious space was essential to providing African
Americans emotional, economic, and social support, numerous Black Christian leaders continued
to challenge white Christian institutional authority in the cultivation of their spaces.
Alternatively, where predominately white leadership was present, Black churchgoers received
theological messaging promoting subservience to white officials. A restrictive white gaze and
external imposition meant congregations also lacked the freedom to more overtly integrate and
experiment with culturally specific song and dance, especially Hoodoo practices like the ringshout and group singing, which were frequently integrated into the Black Christian faith. Black
churches were not, however, always exclusively Black by purposeful exclusion. Traditionally,
pastors and their congregations did not need to intentionally ban white members from joining. By
simply being a cultural entity, Black church communities cultivated a space for Blackness as
totality. For more obvious reasons, white pastors and parishioners avoided Black churches.217
216 Albert J. Raboteau, Slave Religion: The “Invisible Institution” in the Antebellum South, Updated ed (New York:
Oxford University Press, 2004). 139.
217 Ibid., 97-150.
116
Thus, many early Black churches existed as the first sites of practice for Black religious
nationalism. Black churches were the first Black spaces that provided material and social support
while shifting theological interpretations of Blackness outside of racist doctrines like the myth of
Ham and its justification for slavery.218
Christian leaders also reinterpreted the Bible’s message to account for the horrors of
slavery and their eventual freedom. One of the most popular reinterpretations was that of
Exodus, the story of Moses leading the Hebrew people out of slavery in Egypt. African
Americans understood their plight to be akin to the Hebrew people and believed that they, too,
would soon be set free by God’s intervention. Psalm 68:31, also known as the Ethiopian
prophecy, further served as a call for Black emancipation in its claim that the “Princess shall
come forth out of Egypt; Ethiopia shall soon stretch forth her hands unto God.”219 Black
Christian leaders subsequently interpreted the psalm as a call to emigrate back to Africa.
Using similar scriptures as justification, the American Colonization Society—founded in
1816 by Reverend Robert Finley—launched attempts to send African Americans to Africa.
Desiring to quell an expanding free Black population, Robert Finley and other members
proposed returning to Africa and converting “heathen” Africans to Christianity. The campaign
did not garner much support, as free African Americans refused to leave their enslaved brethren,
and many of the white churches did not have the financial resources to support such a
complicated endeavor. Although the early Christian Black missionaries in Africa were not
political and were established solely on the misguided purpose of providing Christian salvation
to non-Christian Africans, later emigration movements were founded on separatist leanings
218 Sylvester Johnson, Myth of Ham in Nineteenth-Century American Christianity: Race, Heathens, and the People
of God, (Palgrave Macmillan, 2016)
219 Roy Kay, The Ethiopian Prophecy in Black American Letters (Gainesville: University Press of Florida, 2011),
https://muse.jhu.edu/book/17962.
117
characteristic of Black nationalism. 19th century emigration movements were led by Black
Christian leaders such as Martin Delany, Edward Blyden, and Alexander Crummell, who
believed simultaneously that Christianity was a blessing brought to African-descended peoples in
the Americas, that it should be espoused directly on the continent, and that the United States
would never be a habitable location for Black people due to white supremacist rule. Delany,
Blyden, and Crummell’s ideology was the beginning of a founding principle in Black
nationalism - Black separatism.220
Physician and journalist Martin Delany was one of Black separatism’s leading
proponents. Delany espoused rhetoric couched in theological underpinnings of Psalm 68:31,
promising African Americans a better life outside the US, initially proposing emigration to
Central and South America, then later—after meeting Nigerian Christians—suggesting West
Africa. As opposed to the growing number of Christian churches preaching docility and moral
obligation as the path toward Black redemption, Delany advocated for African Americans to find
liberation through collective efforts. He was a proponent of the theologically affiliated belief that
God helps those that help themselves. According to Delany, no amount of prayer without
consecrated action could create the type of change necessary for Black liberation. And
consecrated action involved – at least for Delany – “self-efforts,” “attainments,” and necessarily,
emigration. He wrote,
We are no longer slaves, believing any interpretation that our oppressors may give
the word of God, for the purpose of deluding us to more easy subjugation; but
freemen, comprising some of the first minds of intelligence and rudimental
qualifications, in the country.221
220 Gayraud S. Wilmore, Black Religion and Black Radicalism: An Interpretation of the Religious History of African
Americans, 3rd ed., (Maryknoll, NY: Orbis Books, 1998). 125-162.
221 Ibid., 137.
118
In addition to Black separatism, Delany also advocated for racial destiny, another significant
theological foundation of Black nationalism.
Mass understanding of racial destiny was based on Bible passages specifically referring
to the revelation of God’s justice, a justice that “put down the mighty from their seats and exalted
them of low degree,” and a justice that gathered the scattered children of Israel under Nehemiah
and helped them to build the wall of Jerusalem—because the people had mind to work.” Based
on biblical doctrine, Delany and a growing number of Black Christians believed that they were
destined for greatness following the struggle against the evil powers evident in their experience
of an oppressive nation-state.222 Based on biblical text, Black people were thought to follow a
predetermined racial trajectory of contesting white supremacy and eventually moving into a
Black separatist state, which for Delany meant a final return to West Africa. Black separatism,
racial destiny, overcoming the evils of the white state through personal and collective physical
action, and a collective Black exodus were all foundational to an emerging Black religious
nationalism in the early to mid-20th century.
Still, under the pressures of white supremacy, the Black church (as observed by Delaney)
became increasingly assimilated to white authority and theology. Violent racial backlash
following emancipation increased in the Southern states, and between 1885 and 1915, over
thirty-five hundred African Americans were the victims of racist violence. In 1892 alone, 235
Black people were lynched. And Black churches could do little to address the violence. Many
Black church leaders were adopting an increasingly passive approach to social change based on
the influence of white Christian theology that invoked a non-violent Jesus enduring earthly
suffering only to be rewarded in heaven. By the second World War, the Black church at large
222 Ibid., 138.
119
had become a respectable institution with close ties to the NAACP. Reflecting an emerging
Black middle class, with multiple investments in the white state, networked Black churches and
leaders preached incremental change instead of sudden action. Increasingly, working-class
Blacks, more subject to daily racial violence, expressed frustration with the Black church’s lack
of effective intervention and began looking toward other iterations of Black religious
nationalism.223

Around 1930, the Nation of Islam’s (NOI) founder Wallace Dodd Fard, later known as
Wallace Fard Muhammad (or Master Fard Muhammad) preached across Detroit a new religious
approach that explained racial disparity while promising a profound racial destiny. Muhammad
taught that Islam was the authentic Black religion and that whites were devils, descendent of a
people created by a scientist named Yakub, who sought to create a new race through eugenics.
The new race would maintain its existence and supremacy through theft and lies. Muhammad
also taught that, eventually, Black people would overthrow white devils to take Black people’s
rightful place as the rulers of the earth. Although the Nation of Islam’s theology was not derived
from the Koran, NOI leadership constructed the message to help explain the dire circumstances
of Black Muslims living in America and their divine potential. According to the NOI’s doctrine,
Black people existed as the chosen people, and Islam connected them to an African past as well
as a sense of pride in culture and heritage. The Moorish Science Temple (MST), founded in
Newark, NJ, in 1913, had a similar message, asserting that there was no distinction between man
and God and that moral, earthly responsibilities were necessary to achieve one’s divine nature.224
A crucial component of addressing racial and economic discrimination affecting African
Americans was establishing moral guidelines for members. The Nation of Islam and the Moorish
223 Ibid., 165-195
224 Edward Franklin Frazier, The Negro Church in America (New York: Schocken Books, 1974).
120
Science Temple’s rules encouraged members to change their habits. Elijah Muhammad, who
succeeded Wallace D. Fard Muhammad, argued that personal choices and actions impact, not
only the individual, but the community at large. He taught that it was necessary to eat nourishing
foods and relinquish vices plaguing the Black community, such as drugs and alcohol. The Holy
Instructions listed in The Holy Koran of the Moorish Science Temple included similar
requirements, especially the prohibition of pork consumption.225 Thus, most religious converts
began their journey by learning to restrict diet and behavior. When Malcolm X joined the Nation
of Islam, he reportedly gave up pork, cigarettes, gambling, and dating white women.226 Still, both
the NOI and the MST recognized that problems of the African American community could not
be fixed exclusively through personal choice, at least not while living within white America.
Separatism proposed an alternative economic solution for Black communities, as
organizational leadership saw a need to create alternative institutions where investment in
personal growth could flourish with as little interference as possible. The NOI and MST began
encouraging Black community members to create Black-owned businesses, Black publications,
and Black schools that would hire other members and teach the Black community about self-love
and ancestral identity. Elijah Muhammad commissioned farms in Georgia and Alabama, created
a modern printing press, and provided apartment buildings for members of the NOI in addition to
sponsoring entrepreneurial businesses such as restaurants, fish markets, and clothing factories.
The Mosque served as the community’s economic, social, and educational center and received
millions of dollars in investments raised from their businesses. The NOI created an alternative
economic system that kept the community insular and intra-dependent, and consequently, most
225 Ibid.
226 See Les Payne and Tamara Payne, The Dead Are Arising: The Life of Malcolm X, First edition (New York, N.Y:
Liveright Publishing Corporation, a division of W. W. Norton & Company, 2020).
121
members of the NOI advanced into a financial middle class.227 Followers of Noble Drew Ali and
the Moorish Science Temple also found work during the great depression when – before joining
– most had been unemployed. The NOI and the MST’s economic advancement is a considerable
accomplishment given the national financial and racial obstacles Black people faced in
America.228
In the mid-20th century, when the Nation of Islam and the Moorish Science Temple were
at their peak national influence, they succeeded in solidifying some Black religious nationalist
theological beliefs such as separatism and Black divinity, which Martin Delany and other early
Christian nationalist and pan-Africanist leaders espoused. However, by the 1960s and 1970s, as
Black nationalism took on new secular forms and cultural iterations within movements like the
Black Panthers and Afrocentrism, African Americans began searching for other Africanoriginated religious traditions outside of Abrahamic Islam and Christianity. African Americans
developed interest in Egypt and Kemetism, Ghana and Akan traditions, and what was most
prevalent across the transatlantic diaspora, West African Yoruba-originated practices.
The Yoruba religion of Ifá was introduced to African Americans primarily between 1940
and 1960 due to Cuban immigration to major US cities like New York and Miami following the
1959 Cuban revolution. Cuba has a significant Yoruba religious culture because Africans were
still being imported to the island relatively late in the timeline of the wider Atlantic slave trade.
Yoruba captives flooded the trade to Cuba, especially between the 1830s and the 1860s. Orisa/Ifá
religious customs were, thus, vivid in the minds and cultures of arriving Yoruba Africans. To
survive the brutal repression of chattel slavery and forced Catholic conversion, they disguised
227 Edward Franklin Frazier, The Negro Church in America (New York: Schocken Books, 1974). 154-157.
228 See Ibid., Kambiz GhaneaBassiri, A History of Islam in America: From the New World to the New World Order,
1. (Cambridge: Cambridge Univ. Press, 2010); Gayraud S. Wilmore, Black Religion and Black Radicalism: An
Interpretation of the Religious History of African Americans, 3rd ed., (Maryknoll, NY: Orbis Books, 1998).
122
their African deities, the orisa, with Catholic saints. Thus, emerged the religion of Lucumí, more
popularly known as Santeria. When Lucumí priests (referred to as Santeros) arrived in the United
States, they shared their traditions with African Americans who yearned for an African ancestral
connection.229
One of the pioneers in what we might identify as a trans-religious movement to connect
African Americans to African ancestral roots was Walter Eugene King—later known as Oba
Efuntola Oseijeman Adelabu Adefunmi. Adefunmi is credited as the first African American
initiated into the Yoruba religion after being introduced to Ifá through Cuban migrants in New
York City. Eventually, Adefunmi no longer engaged with Lucumí practitioners because he did
not want to incorporate the Catholic saints into his practice. He is quoted admitting, “it would
have been embarrassing if some of the people in my society and organization came to my house
and found I had an altar for Santa Barbara. They wouldn’t have been able to understand it. It
took me a year before Oliana [his friend and mentor] clearly described to me that Santeria only
had a veneer of Christianity and that underneath it, everything else was purely African.”230 Many
leading Cuban initiates were unhappy with Adefunmi’s decision, resulting in division among the
groups. Adefunmi then traveled to Nigeria, where he was initiated into Ifá as a Babalawo and,
upon his return, started Oyotunji Village in South Carolina with a group of people dedicated to
living a de-Europeanized African way of life. At Oyotunju Village, community members
implemented what they referred to as the Isese tradition: Ifá practiced as akin to precolonial
African traditions as possible. Adefunmi and members at Oyotunji Village had a profound
229 Tracey E. Hucks, Yoruba Traditions & African American Religious Nationalism, Religions of the Americas
Series (Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press, 2014).
230 Ibid. 80.
123
impact, initiating hundreds of African Americans into Ifá and spreading the tradition’s rituals,
beliefs, and philosophy in the United States.
Like Delany’s push for emigration to Africa and the NOI’s emphasis on Islam being the
authentic religion of African-descended peoples, Oyotunji Village shared a commitment to
reconnecting with West Africa. Founders established a township with customs that reflected the
material culture and lifestyle of Yoruba and other West African peoples before colonial contact
with Europe. Community members mostly live off the land, honor the orisa, practice polygamy,
and possess West African leadership structures such as the presence of an elder’s council.
Financial resources are generated through divinatory services, Ifá initiation fees, festivals, and
village tours. As religious studies scholar Tracey Hucks explains, “Africa firmly rests at
Oyotunji’s philosophies. …Oyotunji Village stands as a tiny Yoruba enclave, a full lifestyle
alternative, struggling to survive in twenty-first-century North America… Its founder did not
intend to exactly replicate precolonial Africa but instead saw Oyotunji Village as a monument to
their African past.”231
While Black religious nationalist groups like those discussed above made significant
strides in advancing racial unity, promoting economic attainment, and connecting Black
Americans with their African past and cultural history, they also created a particular type of
Black essentialism. It was an essentialism which endorsed patriarchal family and economic
structures and excluded members of the LGBTQ+ community. In one 1970s pamphlet from the
Nation of Islam, members claim, “… [the man] is the leader of the house/nation because his
knowledge of the world is broader, his awareness is greater, his understanding is fuller, and his
231 Ibid., 170.
124
application of this information is wiser...”232 The Moorish Science Temple exhibits a similar
sentiment toward women and LGBTQ+ people. On their current website, in response to the
question of whether queer relationships and people of a transgender experience are permitted in
the group, they write, “In our Moorish Holy Koran, …chapters 21 and 22 speaks about the
relationship between man and woman, husband and wife. It would be going against our own
divine laws and instructions to allow homosexuality, transgenders, sex benders, ect [sic] in our
Temple and in the Moorish movement period. For it would cause confusion for our young men,
young women, and children.”233 African American Yoruba Ifá communities also struggle with
patriarchy. It is often disguised in gender roles deemed traditionally masculine or feminine that
ultimately replicate the same power imbalance witnessed in the West. Women are tasked with
cooking and cleaning instead of being taught the sacred text of the Odu or ritual praxis.
According to one senior priestess, “Women have the opportunity to get initiated, but they will
not be taught by the men. It won’t happen. That’s why I started a group where women can teach
women… but the men will not teach the women.”234 Many women Ifá practitioners are also
critical of plural marriage as it keeps wives focused on the children and on ensuring they receive
enough financial and social support from their husbands.
235 Ifá practicing interlocutors
interviewed for this study also frequently spoke about how, although women are increasingly
respected in the tradition, men are still predominantly in leadership positions.236
232 Qtd in the Combahee River Collective Statement, Keeanga-Yamahtta Taylor, ed., How We Get Free: Black
Feminism and the Combahee River Collective (Chicago, Ill: Haymarket Books, 2017).
233 “Can Homosexuals, Transgenders, Ect. Be A Member And Join the Manor – Moorish Science Temple: The
Divine and National Movement of North America, Inc #13 The Moorish American National Republic,” accessed
January 5, 2022, https://moorishamericannationalrepublic.com/can-homosexuals-transgenders-ect-be-a-memberand-join-the-m-a-n-r/.
234 Qtd in Tracey E. Hucks, Yoruba Traditions & African American Religious Nationalism, Religions of the
Americas Series (Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press, 2014). 325
235 Ibid., 326
236 My gender disparity observations are primarily based on the Ifá leadership in Atlanta, Georgia, where Ile Ori
African Cultural Center remains one of the only Iles with female leadership. Iyalosa Osunyemi, along with other 
125
Notwithstanding the patriarchal and sexist trends in Black nationalist religious cultures,
the 1980s saw a more public development of Black feminism alongside (and in lieu of)
nationalist power and patriarchy. Publications included numerous feminist texts, including bells
hooks’ Ain’t I A Woman: Black Women and Feminism (1981); Audre Lorde’s Zami: A New
Spelling of My Name (1982), and Sister Outsider (1984); and Angela Davis’ Women, Race, and
Class (1981). Black feminists created the basis for a public theory and praxis advocating for the
critical examination of not only race (as was characteristic of Black nationalist and Black
religious nationalist movements), but also gender, sexuality, and social, and economic structures.
Black feminism openly challenged second-wave white feminists who failed to account for race
in their gender analysis. Important theoretical frameworks that came out of the Black feminist
movement include Kimberlé Crenshaw’s conceptualization of intersectionality theory. Crenshaw
popularized the term in her 1989 article on the ways Black women experience both racial and
gender discrimination in the workplace—an occurrence the courts at the time were ill-equipped
to prosecute as definitions of discrimination were exclusive to racial or gender categories.237 bell
hooks’ concept of postmodern Blackness, also had tremendous influence in Black feminist
thought. Postmodern Blackness examines how African American thought has been excluded
from postmodernism as well as myriad discussions on sexuality and gender by activists and
authors.
interlocutors, also confirmed similar patriarchal leadership structures in other cities. At many gatherings, however,
such as the Baba Medahochi Festival in Atlanta, GA, and the United Nation of Ifá, Orisa, and Vodun Gelede
Festival, also in Atlanta, GA, the divine feminine and the mothers are honored. There thus, appears to be a
community-wide desire to resist patriarchal traditions regarding women’s visibility and centrality as deities and
mothers. Leadership, however, has not reflected more egalitarian investments.
237 Kimberle Crenshaw, “Demarginalizing the Intersection of Race and Sex: A Black Feminist Critique of
Antidiscrimination Doctrine, Feminist Theory and Antiracist Politics,” University of Chicago Legal Forum 1989
(1989): 139.
126
The Black feminist movement reflects an African American political turn to a more
secular approach to social change than the explicit religious nationalism of the early 20th century.
The Black church was profoundly deradicalized, the Nation of Islam began its decline with the
departure of Malcolm X from the organization and the passing of Elijah Muhammed in 1975,
and Yoruba religious communities never took up the political cause in the same way as other
Black religious nationalist groups, preferring instead to remain cultural entities.238 In 1979 Alice
Walker coined the term Womanism in her short story “Coming Apart” to account for the
interplay of spirituality, culture, Blackness, and feminism in Black women’s experiences and
collective outlook. The term gained traction among Black women theologians in the 1980s and
1990s with popular works by Jacqueline Grant, Kelly Brown Douglas, and Delores Williams,
among others. Black women theologians, however, were Christian-centered, and some exhibited
elements of heterosexism and homophobia akin to the Black religious nationalist groups
previously discussed.239 In the 21st century, a growing queer and Black feminist discourse has
surfaced on social media, in policy debates around gendered violence and sexuality, and
throughout the academy. As Black feminist discourse infiltrates mainstream media, and as it
couples with Hoodoo’s resurgence, a politically informed emphasis on spirituality emerges from
Black women and femmes that is multi-religious and actively critical of intersections of race,
class, gender, and sexuality while being firmly rooted in African religious heritage. However,
Black witches’ Black feminist Africana religious orientation would by no means exist today if it
238 In the Conclusion, Tracey Hucks notes that “Several orisa practitioners express deep concern that political
activism is no longer central to African American Yoruba identity and that African American Yoruba are not always
committed to organizations, movements, or causes that alleviate the suffering of African descended people
domestically or African people globally.” Ibid., 320.
239 Many scholars such as Pamela R. Lightsey have added a queer discourse to Black womanist theology. See
Pamela R. Lightsey, Our Lives Matter: A Womanist Queer Theology (Eugene, Oregon: Pickwick Publications,
2015).
127
were not for the religiopolitical efforts of their Christian, Islamic, and African traditional
religious predecessors who contributed to many of the contemporary movement’s core
principles.
Black Witches Spaces and Black Separatism
The Black religious nationalism and subsequent separatism of 20th century Black
religious groups represent the kinds of Black worldmaking described by Kevin Quashie. Like
the Black communities created by the NOI or Ifá/Orisa religious practitioners, Quashie
imagines a Black world as,
… a world where blackness exists in the tussle of being, in reverie and
terribleness, in exception and in ordinariness. This Black world is not one where
the radical logics and harming predilections of antiblackness are inverted but one
where blackness is totality, where every human question and possibility is of
people who are black.240
In past and present Black religious communities, members foster a cultural and social space
allowing them to focus on engagement with the divine and personal and communal uplift.
Anti-Blackness is not always at the front of members minds in Black religious communities.
Quashie continues, “…what I want is the freeness of a Black world where Blackness can be of
being, where there is no argument to be made, where there is no speaking to or against an
audience where we are all the audience there is … An antiblack world expects blackness from
black people; in a black world what we expect and get from black people is beingness.”241

One Black space that reflects the investments of Black worldmaking and Black religious
nationalism is the Dawtas of the Moon: Black Witch Convention. The convention occurs
annually in Baltimore, Maryland, but since COVID-19 presented health risks, it was held online
240 Kevin Everod Quashie, Black Aliveness, or a Poetics of Being (Durham: Duke University Press, 2021), 1-2.
241 Ibid., 9-10. Emphasis mine.
128
for the years 2020-2023. Founded by Iya Omitola Yejide Ogunsina, a priestess of Yemoja, a
Rootworker, and a doula, Dawtas of the Moon convention seeks to bring together “the Witches,
aje, Daughters of the Iyaami, Women of Conjure, Rootworkers, and Shamans…to heal
[themselves], each other, and [their] community by reconnecting to our ancestral magick.”242
The convention is intentionally Black, requiring photo identification of all registrants. According
to Iya Omitola, creating an intentionally Black space allows participants to be entirely
comfortable. She announced at the 2020 convention that,
This is a safe space, and we don’t have too many safe spaces. I think that one of
the things that continually brings sisters back to Dawtas of the Moon is being able
to walk into a space and seeing people who got on their crystals, got their locks,
got their afros, look like them, have similar experiences, we can talk a certain way
without having to monitor ourselves, we can do the head roll. We can talk sh*t.
We can laugh. We can do all of those things because we are around people who
understand it, relate to it, and it is just a part of who we are.
243
Another significant emerging community space of the Black witch is on social media.
Facebook groups, Instagram accounts, and Tik-Tok videos all serve as spaces where Black
witches can exchange ritual information, act as virtual mentors for the novice practitioner and
suggest books related to the traditions. Some spaces include “Melanated Witchcraft: Hoodoo for
Black Women,” which grew to over seventeen thousand members in only four months, and the
group “Magically Spiritual Black Women,” which draws a crowd of over fifty-eight thousand
members. One particular social media group that strongly emphasizes Black feminism, queer
thought, and a commitment to Blackness is “The Witches Brew: Indigenous Rootwork and
Conjure.” The group was founded in 2016 by Daizy October Latifah of TheAfroMystique.com,
and has over 10,000 members, with additional daily requests for membership. Resources abound
242 “Dawtas of the Moon: Black Witch Coven | Facebook,” accessed January 5, 2022,
https://www.facebook.com/dawtasofthemoon.
243 Omitola Yejide Ogunsina, discussion at Dawtas of the Moon Convention, October 2020. 
129
in The Witches’ Brew with hundreds of downloadable files, including books on Ifá, spells for
glamor, lists of reputable diviners, and scholarly texts on the histories of Black religions. Like
Muslim, Christian and Ifá/Orisa religious institutions, Black witch digital spaces also possess
informal hierarchy systems with people such as Iyalosa Osunyemi, Daizy, and Toya Smith
positioned as respected voices of authority. Black witch leaders acquire their authority through
years of vetted spiritual contributions such as performing divinations or selling efficacious
magical oils. I had the opportunity to speak with Daizy and Toya who both expressed a Black
religious nationalist commitment to Black separatism while emphasizing a commitment to Black
feminism, queer and trans bodies, and a multi-religious nature characteristic of the Black witch
space. Daizy’s description of the Witches’ Brew Facebook group—the first introduction seekers
encounter when they join—exemplifies Black witch political commitments.
The Witches Brew: Indigenous Rootwork and Conjure is *the first* original FB
group created by and for Black Rootworkers, Conjurers, and Black Witches of
African descent. The group was founded by Daizy October of
TheAfroMystic.com and moderated by Anika Rich of BlackGirlBliss.com. The
group’s admins have roots in Traditional Black Belt Hoodoo (the system of
African Spiritual Practice maintained by Black folks in the Black American
South), but practitioners of all African spiritual systems are welcomed as this is a
Pan-African celebration of the spiritual systems practiced by our Ancestors across
the globe. All genders of African/Afro-diasporic people are welcomed. NOTE:
This is a safe space, so absolutely no antiBlack sentiments are allowed in the
group. Even certain groups of Black folks are asked to check your privilege at the
door. Adding to the group requires a visible photo on your profile and answering
ALL of the submission questions.244
I spoke with Toya, a conjure woman, Ifá practitioner, and Black witch living in Baltimore,
Maryland, who expanded on the group’s description and purpose.
The Witches Brew is so Black, right? It is so full of love and wisdom and holding
space for one another and allowing a place for us to be as Black as we possibly
can without recrimination and without code-switching, and without feeling like
244 “The Witches Brew: Indigenous Rootwork & Conjure | Facebook,” accessed January 5, 2022,
https://www.facebook.com/groups/1338273066200347.
130
you have to defer to anybody else. It is a safe space for those of us who are
marginalized in other ways, such as those of us who are women or non-men.
Those of us who are queer or questioning and those of us who have different
styles of loving. It feels even in the moments when we’re dragging each other or
‘memeing’ each other to death, it feels like a place where I can be completely
myself and say what I want to say, ask the questions that are on my heart, speak to
people who are still finding their way. You know? Offer to others the same
gentleness, the same patience, the same wisdom that was offered to me when I
was figuring my way out. And I’ve made so many friends and formed a
community there with folks who I would never have met otherwise. A lot of folks
live right in this area, but I would never have known them otherwise if it wasn’t
for Facebook in general and the Witch’s Brew in particular. I’m really thankful
that it’s a space that exists and that I’ve been trusted to pipe up in there and talk to
folks. It’s been a beautiful experience.245
For Toya, “The Witches Brew” must stay Black because, without white people, members are
free to express themselves, learn from each other and hold one another accountable without fear
of judgment. It allows for Black vernacular, African American cultural references, and a shared
understanding of anti-Blackness and its iterations without censoring or explaining anything to
non-Black members. Cultural familiarity and a general sense of comfort noted in contemporary
Black witch spaces were also crucial to Black spaces during slavery such as the praise houses
and Black churches. Black folks have always needed a community that could exist without the
violence of whiteness and the white gaze. Curious about the development of her political stance,
and the presence of Black community in her upbringing (prior to joining The Witches Brew), I
asked Toya to expand on her own sense of familiarity and comfort in and with Black space.
It’s very much a part of my family. I never understood other ways to be. I’m
confused by Black people who care about respectability or the things of
whiteness. That’s never anything that I was raised with. I was raised by
grandparents and parents who centered Blackness, who actually taught me not to
trust white people at all and raised me in an environment that was almost
exclusively Black. So, it’s always been the center of my life. It’s been the center
of what I find beautiful. I think my entire political idea is about decolonization,
and the easiest way to be decolonized is to center Blackness. And the way we do
that is by saying, I’m not thinking about white folks, but the minute you say I’m
245 Toya Smith, In discussion with author via Zoom, May 25, 2021.
131
not thinking about white folks, you’ve centered whiteness. It just shouldn’t be a
part of the conversation. If we’re talking about Black people, we’re talking about
Black people. If we’re focusing on Black people, we’re focusing on Black people.
And so, you know, I am very Black. My child is very Black. Our religions are
very Black. When I look in the face of God, the face is my face, and there’s no
way not to have your political ideas affected by that. It would be cognitive
dissonance for me to say everything about my personal life is Black. But then,
when I start thinking community level and globally, I’m focusing on something
else, no. Everything, everything about me, is Black. Everything I think about is
about Blackness. It’s my worldview. My worldview is Blackness.246
Like Christian leaders such as Martin Delany, who coupled the separatist move to Africa with
theological rhetoric of Black redemption, and similar to Islamic groups’ separatist
entrepreneurial economic structures couched in beliefs of the white devil and Black divinity,
Toya embraces Black separatism and its theological reasoning, but through a Hoodoo
orientation. I asked her to elaborate on the importance of Blackness for The Witches Brew and
Hoodoo, especially when employing social media as a community space. She responded,
It’s important because right now, we are in a wave of Black recognition, and
social media has really helped. Social media can be hurtful, but in many ways, it
is helping us share our ancient traditions in new ways. We’re reaching each other
in ways that we wouldn’t have been able to before. You know, there is, there’s no
other kind of way that I could teach somebody who lives in Dubai about the
ancestor veneration I learned in Baltimore. And because of that, we need it to be
an all-Black space. Why? Because we need to feel that we can be completely
ourselves, that we can share our knowledge with one another without the fear of
others’ eyes. And because we all know that anything that is Black, not just our
spiritual traditions, anything that is Black is stolen and commodified and watered
down by other people. And that has happened in Hoodoo to the point where Black
people themselves don’t know that Hoodoo isn’t just candles that you got from a
Botanica. That we aren’t just putting blood in spaghetti. They believe what
they’ve heard in popular culture about Hoodoo. It can be hard to find Blackowned businesses to buy supplies and hard to find Black teachers.
And Hoodoo at its base is ancestor veneration. All our work is powered by our
ancestral connection. And so, if you have no ancestral connection, then I don’t
know what you’re doing, but whatever you’re doing is not Hoodoo. It makes no
sense to me that High John the Conqueror would ever work on behalf of a white
246 Ibid.
132
person. That does not make any sense. It doesn’t make sense that my enslaved
ancestors would rise and do work on behalf of a white person. They had to do
[that] in the body. And now that they are free from their bodies, do you think they
would choose that? Of course, they wouldn’t. So, it doesn’t matter to me that
white people claim that they’re practicing Hoodoo because I know it’s not true.
Folks get very up in arms and want to defend Hoodoo, and I don’t feel the need to
defend it. I don’t have to defend my ancestors. I know that there is power in the
blood, and if you don’t share the blood, you don’t have that power. And that is not
to say that white people don’t have their own ancestral magic. They do. It just
isn’t Hoodoo. And so, you know, for me, that’s really what it’s about. If I call
myself a Hoodoo practitioner, then I must practice in the way my African
forbearers did, and I have to do it with other Black people. There’s no other way
to do Hoodoo. There are many ways to be magical, but if you’re going to do
Hoodoo, then it gotta be Black, that’s it.247
Myesha, owner of the Hoodoo supply shop, Cognac & Conjure, affirmed Toya’s analysis of
Hoodoo being an exclusively Black religion on her blog.
[White people] do not have the dead to capably work anything resembling
conjure. They didn’t inherit our pre-existing pacts with specific plants, Cymbee,
the Conjuresses of Old, nor are they descendants of any Maroon populations that
did much of the preservation work in this tradition. They can buy a million and
one High John the Conqueror roots, they can haphazardly slap together cloth
sacks and call it mojo or gris gris, they can chew and spit galanagal and say a
psalm, but it will never move the same or with an equivalent efficacy if it moves
at all. The target of the work cannot also teach the work.248
When Myesha says, ‘The target of the work cannot also teach the work,’ she refers to a long
history of enslaved Africans using spiritual tools to aid in opposition to white supremacist
oppression. Iterations of resistance include documented accounts of enslaved Africans
employing herbs to poison slave masters, rituals to aid in slave revolts such as the Nat Turner
247 Ibid.
248 “Roots, Hoodoo and Conjuration: The First African American Religion,” Cognac & Conjure, accessed January 5,
2022, https://www.cognacxconjure.com/myeshxa/2019/7/30/roots-hoodoo-and-conjuration-the-first-africanamerican-religion.
133
rebellion or the Denmark Vesey conspiracy in South Carolina, and post-emancipation ritual work
to keep police from entering Black homes.249
Myesha also addresses the Africana philosophical foundations of Hoodoo. Even though
practitioners and scholars widely accept that Hoodoo has European pagan, Indigenous American,
and Christian elements such as the Psalms, the Bible, and plants used in indigenous American
pharmacology, most contemporary practitioners understand the religion to still be Black.250
Womanist theologian Stephanie Mitchem speaks to a reinterpretation of religion in her analysis
of African American folk healing, claiming, “African American folk healing in the twenty-first
century is not lifting past practices of folk healing whole cloth… It is the fine strands, the spirit
rather than the letter, that are transferred to contemporary practices. These practices may utilize
contemporary knowledge, but practitioners still self-identify themselves and their work as
Black.”251 Because Hoodoo is socially and historically understood as an ancestral religion,
predicated on African-descended ancestors, and grounded in African philosophical belief
systems, many deem it impossible for non-Black practitioners to properly harness Hoodoo’s
power. Furthermore, Toya and Myesha both underscore that their separatist leanings are in part a
response to a history of white capitalist exploitation that undermined the Hoodoo tradition.
In the early 20th century, Blacks sought to escape the white Southern violence that ensued
during and following reconstruction, especially racist Jim Crow laws and persistent lynchings.
From 1916 to 1970 – in what has come to be known as The Great Migration – around six million
249 Hoodoo employed in resistance is discussed in more detail in Chapter One but also see Yvonne Chireau, Black
Magic: Religion and the African American Conjuring Tradition (Berkeley, CA: University of California Press,
2006). 51-89., Zora Hurston, “Hoodoo in America,” The Journal of American Folklore 44, no. 174 (1931): 317–417,
https://doi.org/10.2307/535394.
250 See Ibid, Katrina Hazzard-Donald, Mojo Workin’: The Old African American Hoodoo System (Urbana, IL:
University of Illinois Press, 2013).
251 Stephanie Y. Mitchem, African American Folk Healing (New York: New York University Press, 2007). 87.
134
African Americans traveled north in search of better employment and physical and psychological
safety for themselves and their families. Migrating African Americans brought with them their
religious traditions but no longer had access to the rich pharmacopeia of the South in the highly
industrialized North.
In the South, most Blacks lived in rural conditions with a close connection to the land and
its resources; therefore, the practitioners gathered Hoodoo supplies, such as herbs and animal
remains, making most of them expert herbalists. When African Americans arrived in northern
cities, they were desperate for materials to supplement their practice.
After reconstruction and until World War II, white Ashkenazi Jews—outsiders to the
tradition—became the primary suppliers of Hoodoo items. They mass-produced Hoodoo
products like mojo bags, divination tools, and harvested herbs in bulk. During these 70 years,
charlatans advertised in magazines claiming they could foresee the future and sold spiritual
objects that, once consecrated by a trained rootworker, turned out to lack any spiritual efficacy.
Katrina Hazzard-Donald identifies the period of commercialized Hoodoo as the tradition’s
second era, which she differentiates from the regional, or Black Belt Hoodoo, prominent during
slavery and immediately following emancipation.252 By the time Zora Neale Hurston and Harry
Middleton Hyatt extensively documented Hoodoo in the mid-20th century, capitalism and
commercialization altered Hoodoo’s reputation. Fake rootworkers fostered a general distrust of
the practice in African American Northern communities leading to its subsequent
decline.253 Today, as leaders like Toya and Myesha work to resurrect some of the practices and
philosophies established before commercialization, they embrace traditions of Black separatism.
252 Katrina Hazzard-Donald, Mojo Workin’: The Old African American Hoodoo System (University of Illinois Press,
2013), 84-115.
253 Ibid. 
135
In hopes of avoiding traps of commercialized spirituality and white supremacy, Hoodoo leaders
are meticulous about how they spread knowledge, specifically in their decision to mentor only
Black practitioners and champion the religion’s African connection.
Black Space and Multi-Religiosity
While most Black witches are Hoodoo devotees, numerous individuals practice other
African-heritage religions such as Ifá, Vodou, or Lucumí. Many Black witches, like Toya, follow
multiple traditions, with the most common among my interviewees being Hoodoo and Ifá. In the
Witches Brew, for example, founder Daizy October Latifah shared that although the group
focuses on Hoodoo because that is her tradition, there are practitioners of different faiths. “We’re
getting practitioners of all different African spiritual traditions, which I always wanted, you
know? It’s a pan-African community with all different genders and sexual orientations, but all
with the commitment of developing our connection with the divine.”254 Daizy also posted a
group poll in which members were asked to note their religious tradition. Most claimed Hoodoo,
the second largest group was Yoruba-heritage traditions, and third was Vodou. But in the 105
comments below the poll, most people responded saying that they practice multiple traditions.
There are two crucial reasons that multi-religiosity is a significant occurrence among
Black witches. First, multi-religiosity diverges from traditional, or Isese, practices of Ifá, shifting
from an ‘authentic’ or essentialist notion of religion influenced by a single cultural lineage into
one that is diasporically Black and yet suited to the particular needs of African American
practitioners. Second, it draws from some Black religious nationalists’ religiopolitical impulse to
employ a variety of modalities to positively impact individual and community improvement.
254 Daizy October Latifah, In discussion with author via Zoom, October 1, 2021.
136
Similar to the Black separatism of Christian and Islamic Black religious nationalist groups, many
practitioners understand multi-religiosity as a theological commitment required of them by their
ancestors. Yet simultaneously, it is a political agenda that accounts for African Americans’ social
location in slavery’s afterlife where practitioners must use available resources, including their
collective imagination, for a life beyond survival.
Still – as some my interviewees note – numerous practitioners of African-heritage
religions are not pleased with a multi-religious or blended approach to religion. They see it as not
authentically true to the traditions of early Africans and, as such, missing some associated power.
Exclusive religious practice is a belief particularly held by Ifá practitioners of the Isese tradition,
which is a lineage that aims to practice their religion as close to the Yoruba version as possible
versus, say, diasporic iterations such as Lucumí or Candomblé. Members frequently make trips
to Nigeria to learn from priests and priestesses, are exclusively initiated on the continent, dress in
West African garb, and learn the Yoruba language as a part of their religious obligations. In one
Isese ile, for example, members shared that a commitment to more than one religion, in their
opinion, “waters down” the power of Ifá. When presented with a flyer for a Hoodoo ritual in a
group chat, one initiated Babalawo expressed a religiously exclusive position. “We are Ifá
practitioners, and many of us are very serious about Ifá, to the degree that we don’t have
anything else. Christianity and Islam or even Lucumí and Palo are not options for us… Too
many people mix traditions while not fully gaining the ase from one or the other. I caution all my
clients from cross-referencing Ifá with other aspects of spirituality.” Leading members of the ile,
of which he is a part, echoed the belief that traditional Ifá practitioners should not practice more
than one tradition as it diminishes its power or ase. As noted in the following interview excerpts, 
137
it is evident that faithful adherence to one tradition is a prevalent conviction among broader Isese
Ifá communities.255
In my interview with Toya, she shared that because she is a member of an ile that
honors every aspect of her ancestral lineage, she does not have to choose between
traditions.
The Orisha have been pulling at me for years. Since I was a little girl, I’ve been
fascinated with them, yet my Hoodoo spirits, my Congo spirits, those ancestors
have always been very loud, very greedy. They’re always like, “us first.” And so,
no matter how much I was enamored with the Orisha, it was as if they would not
allow me to join an ile or to go in that direction. I had to give them my time and
attention, and it wasn’t until, very recently, maybe five years ago, that I came
upon my now godmother, my Iya, who was running her own ile under New
Afrikan Vodun. And one of the wonderful things about New Afrikan Vodun is
that we believe we must reclaim all of our ancestral spiritual practices. So, there
was no having to choose one or the other. If I was going to be a part of that ile, I
knew that my Congo spirits ain’t going anywhere, that they are to be served and
propitiated first, and that it was with their allowance that I could join an ile, to
begin with. That’s the beautiful part of New Afrikan Vodun that everybody in the
ile also practices another form of African religion. Most of us are Hoodoo folks,
but some serve the Lwa.256
In fact, when I first went to the river and got my elekes I was told how to do an
altar in Isese tradition. I came home to reconfigure my altar because I was going
to do it according to the rules, and my spirit said, no, ma’am. No, you may not.
We like it just like it is. And I was a little confused and called my Iya and was
like, “so the ancestors said that they don’t want me to put my altar the way you
said,” and she said, “well then you don’t put your altar the way I said. You do
what your ancestors said, don’t ever, don’t ever do what I say over what your
ancestors say.” They come first in all ways. That’s what African traditional
religion is about. We always bow at the feet of our ancestors. You do whatever
they tell you to do. So, yeah, it’s never been in conflict, and I’m very thankful.
Cause I know some other folks have had a conflict with trying to choose what is
255 Anonymous, In discussion with author. In person., March 4, 2021.
256 New Afrikan Vodun emerged from the New Afrikan People’s conference in Detroit, MI, in 1968. They sought to
develop a religion unique to African diasporic people by combining Vodun, Kongo, and Ifa/Orisa traditions. Baba
Medahochi K. O. Zannu is one of its founders. See “From the manuscript New Afrikan Vodun by Medahochi K. O.
Zannu,” accessed May 1, 2023, https://vodunsi.tripod.com/forstate.html; “Our Work,” United Nation of Ifa-OrisaVodun, accessed May 1, 2023, https://uniov.org/media.
138
most important, having to choose one line of worship. And thankfully, I haven’t
had to do that.257
For Toya, it’s not just Black separatism that feels necessary, but practicing two traditions is a
theological commitment as the orisa have “been pulling at [her] for years,” and her Congo spirits
also demanded her attention. Her ancestors come first and dictate how she engages with deities
from other lineages. Toya is also speaking to a widely held belief among Africana religious
practitioners in the US: one must engage one’s ancestors first before invoking any deities. Even
in most orisa traditions, practitioners are required to consult with an initiated priest or priestess
who can perform divination to connect one to a particular orisa.
More recently, in the late 20th century, a significant number of Black Americans
interested in African-heritage religions began their journey by connecting with deities as opposed
to their ancestors. Spiritual leaders who have published widely circulated books have introduced
orisa traditions to a broader African American audience and encouraged non-initiated
practitioners to connect with deities through personal rituals. Among the most popular are Luisah
Teish’s Jambalaya: The Natural Woman’s Book of Personal Charms and Practical Rituals,
Monique Joiner Siedlak’s Seven African Powers: The Orishas, and Tobe Melora Correal’s
Finding Soul on the Path of Orisa: A West African Spiritual Tradition. Teish, Siedlak, and
Correal exposed a new generation to orisa traditions, a groundbreaking act as initiated
practitioners have historically kept orisa traditions inaccessible to the broader public due to fear
of persecution, misrepresentation, and exploitation. Since African-heritage religious traditions
have become popularized, novice practitioners are first turning to the orisa for guidance and
support instead of calling upon their ancestors or their intuitive guide, known in Ifá as the Ori.
Many Hoodoo and Ifá practitioners will advise seekers to first connect with their Ori or
257 Toya Smith, In discussion with author via Zoom, May 25, 2021.
139
ancestors, who are believed to be more invested in their descendant’s success and, therefore,
more likely to assist in providing desired outcomes.258
As Toya noted, she also belongs to an ile, influenced by New Afrikan Vodun which
supports the practice of multiple traditions. New Afrikan Vodun also calls itself Ifá-Orisa-Vodun
and seeks “To promote, teach and maintain the traditions of our Ancestors. To heal, unify and
facilitate sustainability for our families, individuals, and groups around our communities. To
become self-sufficient economically and to shape the minds of our community so that we
become uplifters and bring the houses of Ifá-Orisa-Vodun together.”259 Ifá-Orisa-Vodun’s
expressed desire for economically self-sufficient communities in their mission statement
suggests a Black nationalist agenda. Their website notes the organization’s founding on March
28, 1968, as an outgrowth of the Provisional Government of the Republic of New Afrika
(RNA).260 The RNA was a Black nationalist organization that claimed Southern territory as
rightfully belonging to African American peoples, demanded reparations and ordered that
African descended people be given a choice as to American citizenship. Malcolm X and Queen
Mother Audley Moore were considered the mother and father of the organization, and Oyotunji
Village founder Oba Efuntola Adefumi I was a respected member.
Leaders of Ifá-Orisa-Vodun are fully aware that their approach to religion is unacceptable
to many traditional practitioners of Ifá and note the tension in the following passage on their
website.
Most new movements always come under some form of criticism. The United
Nation of Ifá-Orisa-Vodun is no exception. Are they authentic or legitimate? On
the larger scale, We see this with the very practice of Ifá, where Priests are
initiated by Our own people in the Western Hemisphere. It did not matter that We
have been doing Our own ritual and initiatory work throughout Our collective
258 Observations based on ethnographic research.
259 “About,” United Nation of Ifá-Orisa-Vodun, accessed January 5, 2022, https://uniov.org/bio. Emphasis mine.
260 See “Media,” United Nation of Ifá-Orisa-Vodun, accessed January 5, 2022, https://uniov.org/media
140
enslavement to the present. There are groupings of Nigerians (ethnically Yoruba)
who maintain that their Ase/power and authority is absolute and anything We do
is secondary. There are groupings of Cubans who have a similar, yet different,
edict. In the West, they claim primacy. In fact, some boast that they have more
Babalowo in Cuba than there are in Nigeria. What is troubling about all of this is
that it disrespects Our contributions to the study and practice of traditional
Afrikan religions and what We have done in the absence of their participation in
Our creations and practice. Moreover, there is no analysis of the fact that these
communities are, as is the world, oppressed and exploited by white
supremacy/imperialism. We all share a common enemy. We all have valuable
knowledge and experiences to share to ensure victory in Our restoration
movement to create a better world.261
The United Nation of Ifá-Orisa-Vodun are not alone with regard to the question of
multiple religious belonging. Sam, also known as Juju Bae, who runs the international broadcast
“A Little Juju Podcast,” shared a similar understanding of multi-religiosity.
Similar to Toya, Sam is a member of an ile that supports people who practice multiple
traditions. She acknowledges that a non-traditional approach is taboo among some Isese
practitioners. So, I inquired why she, a practitioner of both Hoodoo and Ifá, adheres to two
traditions.
… I think they do different things. They are different technologies that can arrive
at similar results. Like I can get money or healing or protection from both, but
they go about it in different ways, and some ways feel good sometimes, and other
ways feel good other times. I just think I want options on how I want to deal with
certain situations. And by practicing both, I know that I can pick and choose.262
Returning to the point that some Iles are uncomfortable with members engaging in
multiple traditions, I asked Sam about her ile, the Obafemi Institute for the Divine Study of Ifá
(OIDSI).
The premise of the Obafemi Institute is to do what works. We call ourselves Isese,
but we are traditional non-traditionalists. We do certain things that align with
Isese practices, but sometimes we give warriors, for example, a Lucumí, not an
Isese practice. This is because a lot of us are African American folks who are not
261 Ibid.
262 Sam aka Juju Bae, In discussion with author via Zoom, May 10, 2021.
141
going to do everything the way that Isese does it and because it was created by a
particular people in a country with certain ideals and customs that we don’t have.
We were stripped from that due to the transatlantic slave trade. So, if Ifá is not
able to change with the times, is it still relevant? As mostly African American
people, we have a different experience. Our practices are a bit different, but none
of the core tenants of what makes Ifá, Ifá have changed, just how we go about
some of our rituals. I think people aren’t happy about this conversation about our
ile and iles in general. They don’t like that. It creates a lot of interesting
conversations and dynamics within the community, but it works. If people are
flourishing and living good lives, then what’s the issue?263
The Obafemi Institute’s non-traditional, traditional approach to employing the available
spiritual resource to assist in one’s life is not new for African Americans. Although a blended or
multi-religious approach to religion is evident in Hoodoo’s development, as discussed in Chapter
One, blending was also employed by Black religious nationalists of the early 20th century with
the purpose of community uplift. Many Islamic groups institutionalized a Black religious
tradition that was Muslim in its devotion to Allah and the use of the Koran but re-imaginative in
how they interpreted symbols and origin stories. For example, Prophet Nobel Drew Ali, who
founded the Moorish Science Temple, created a version of Islam influenced by various sources,
including Freemasonry and Spiritualism. The sacred text of the Moorish Science Temple, The
Circle Seven Koran, is not found in the Koran but was appropriated from Levi Dowling’s The
Antiquarian Gospel (1907) and Unto Thee I Grant. The underlying message of these texts is that
there is no distinction between man and God.264 The Circle Seven Koran teaches, “When man
sees Allah as one with him, as Father Allah he needs no middleman, no priest, to intercede . . .
He goes straight up to Him and says: ‘My father God, Allah!’ And then he lays his hands in
263 Ibid.
264 Kambiz GhaneaBassiri, A History of Islam in America: From the New World to the New World Order,
(Cambridge: Cambridge Univ. Press, 2010). 219-227.
142
Allah’s own hand, and all is well.”265 Noble Drew Ali combined multiple religious traditions to
instill cultural dignity and motivation to achieve economic stability within his Black followers.
In the 1960s, another Black Islamic group, The Five Percenters, merged concepts from
the Nation of Islam with the leader Clarence 13X’s teachings. Clarence 13X taught that each
Black man is a God in his own right, borrowing from The Nation of Islam’s student enrollment
lesson that claimed, “ … The Original Man is the Asiatic Black Man, the Maker, the Owner, the
Cream of the Planet Earth, the Father of Civilization, and God of the Universe.”266 Going against
the teachings of the Nation of Islam, Clarence 13X argued that there is no set of orthodox rules
that a man must follow to actualize his Godliness; each God has his own path and, therefore, life
guidelines. Clarence 13X took the lesson literally and taught young Black men in New York that
they need to realize their innate divinity to live to their potential. A gospel of inherent divinity
was transformative for young Black men on the streets of Harlem who endured police and gang
violence and lack of access to adequate food, housing, and education. As a result, many young
Black men turned their attention away from confronting white harassment to preaching the
divine power of Blackness to their community.267
Black religious movements centered on women’s leadership also adopted spiritual
practices to address social justice concerns. In the 1920s and 1930s, Mother Clara James Hyde
played an essential role in the proliferation of Spiritualism, opening thirty-eight Spiritualist
churches in Louisiana, Alabama, Texas, Arkansas, Illinois, and New York. Mother Hyde was
particularly distinguished for her ability to heal church members through energy work. Hundreds
265 Ibid., 220.
266 Grey, Biko M. “Show and Prove Five Percenters and the Study of African American Esotericism.” In Esotericism
in African American Religious Experience, edited by Steven C Finely, Margarita S Guillory, and Hugh R Page, 171–
197. Leiden: Brill, 2015. 173.
267 Ibid., 171–181. 
143
of people came to receive her healing services on Sunday, Monday, and Wednesday evenings.
Those church members experiencing “trouble” in their lives came up to the pulpit where Mother
Hyde rubbed them with oil on the affected area and read the scripture while calling on the
ancestors’ support. The client needed to have complete faith in the process for healing to take
effect.268 Anthropologist Zora Neale Hurston describes Mother Hyde’s method in an
ethnographic account, writing, “Mother Hyde… burns candles as do the Catholics, sells the spirit
oil, but gives a ‘cake’ to be used with the oil. This bit of cake, saturated with spirit oil, is
enclosed in a salve box with ‘God be with us’ written on top.”269 Margarita Guillory analyzes
Hurston’s accounts as follows,
On the one hand, the employment of candles denotes Catholicism, while the
invocation of God, a spirit being, represented the Spiritualist faith. The presence
of cake and a salve box, on the other hand, were objects that were commonly
associated with the practice of hoodoo in New Orleans. The spirit oil served a
dual function in that it was used as an anointing oil in churches and as an invoking
agent in Spiritualist churches and hoodoo rituals.270
Guillory concludes that Catholicism, Spiritualism, and Hoodoo were complementary religious
systems. Mother Hyde and other Spiritualist leaders moved easily between Christianity and
conjure because the purpose of healing rituals was efficacy. Healers used what tools they had
available to support their clientele. Guillory emphasizes that healing is a social justice initiative.
“When the individual performs the prescribed ritual with a confidence of certainty in the spirit’s
power, the individual resists the condition or affliction. Then, the act becomes a form of
resistance… With the help of their guiding spirits, the individual was empowered to operate as
though they controlled their daily existence.”271
268 Guillory, Margarita Simon. Spiritual and Social Transformation in African American Spiritual Churches: More
than Conjurers. Abingdon, Oxon: Routledge, 2018. 79-82.
269 Ibid., 80.
270 Ibid.
271 Ibid., 82.
144
Toya’s affiliation with Ifá-Orisa-Vodun and Sam’s work with OIDSI speak to the
expansion and reimagining of historical notions of Black religious nationalism and theological
approaches to politics. Sam and Toya’s connections to Black religious nationalist groups places
them – and, their Black feminist Africana religious orientation - within a long tradition of
religious movements, using blended or multi-religious approaches and aspects creatively to
enhance Black livelihood and wellbeing. Their approach, when undertaken by Black witches
who are also the descendants of and informed by generations of Black feminists, creates a new
theological agenda: one replete with feminine power.
A Black Feminist Discourse
As discussed in Chapters One and Two, the witch is a category typically assigned to
women, particularly older women, to keep them subservient to patriarchal rule and to demonize
their magical practices. Therefore, it is logical that contemporary Black witches would interpret
the current movement as being oppositional to patriarchy not merely through a feminist lens but
an intersectional Black feminist analysis that accounts for race and gender. Black feminism,
alongside her sister analytic frameworks like Womanism, are tools to help Black women
understand and better themselves and their worlds. And like the Combahee River Collective
professed, when the Black woman is free, everyone is free.272 In other words, Black feminism is
a framework that doesn’t just allow us to comprehend the experiences of Black women but the
various interlocking systems that affect all people operating under white supremacist, capitalist
patriarchy.273 Black witches’ Black feminist Africana religious orientation is a theological,
272 See the Combahee River Collective Statement in Keeanga-Yamahtta Taylor, ed., How We Get Free: Black
Feminism and the Combahee River Collective (Chicago, Ill: Haymarket Books, 2017).
273 bell hooks, The Will to Change: Men, Masculinity, and Love, 1. (New York London Toronto Sydney:
Washington Square Press, 2005).
145
spiritual iteration of Black feminism because, as a practice of mostly Black women and femmes,
it is profoundly concerned with their healing, self-awareness, and economic and social
betterment. Like the Black religious nationalism discussed in this chapter, it sacralizes the
process of economic and social justice but, in effect, also sacralizes Black women and femmes,
something that earlier masculinist movements have only done in word but not in practice.274

Respected leader Iyalosa Osunyemi Akalatunde extensively discussed a Black feminist approach
to Africana religions, emphasizing that Black women and femmes are sacred and can use their
craft to protect themselves and their communities from interlocking forms of oppression.
Iyalosa Osunyemi is initiated to the Yoruba deity Osun, practices Hoodoo, and has
influenced practitioners through her YouTube channel on Black witchcraft for over a decade.
Similar to Toya and Sam, Iyalosa Osunyemi descends from a religious nationalist lineage
through training under the late Baba Medahochi Zannu, a renowned Afrikan nationalist who was
initiated into many African traditions, including Palo, Vodun, and Ifá. Like members of OIDSI,
Baba Medahochi was an advocate for employing African spiritual traditions toward a
revolutionary agenda. His teachings inspired the Black religious nationalist group Ifá-OrisaVodun and he studied under Oba Oseijiman Adefunmi, the founder of Oyotunji Village. His
approach to African religions is profoundly political – toward the end of Afrikan people’s
“political, cultural and social sovereignty” - and he believes “that religion is the deification of
someone’s nationalism and religion is only relevant if it deifies your nationalism.”275 That
Medahochi informed Iyalosa Osunyemi’s religiopolitical thought demonstrates the profound
influence of Black religious nationalism on Black witches’ Black feminist Africana religious
274 It is common to hear Black women referred to as ‘queens’ or ‘empresses’ among Black religious nationalists
while still perpetuating forms of patriarchy that keep women in subservient roles. Due to homophobia and a strict
gender binary, non-binary femmes are not likely celebrated or recognized.
275 https://www.babamedahochi.com/biography.html
146
orientation. Even if Osunyemi’s followers are not explicitly aware of Medahochi’s teachings,
they learn his philosophy through Osunyemi’s extensive online presence. As evident in the
following passages, however, Black witches like Osunyemi are expanding the revolutionary
scope of earlier Black religious nationalist teachings by emphasizing power and protection for
Black women and femmes.
I asked Iyalosa Osunyemi why she claims that “all witchcraft is Black,” to which she
spoke about the sacrality of the Black woman.
What we consider to be witchcraft in the modern world is European witchcraft.
Even the term is a Celtic term that means wise woman. When we’re thinking of a
witch, we often think of the definition of a white woman, generally an elderly
white woman. But if you study the craft, the things that we consider to be
witchcraft are what came out of Britain before the Romans colonized it. The
original people who brought that way of life were the indigenous people of
Britain, and those people were brown. And so, the mother that they were
worshipping was the Black mother, the great Black mother. We can look at the
Venus of Willendorf or other prehistoric mothers that we see carved in every
place on earth; all those are Black women.
They all have the Black woman’s figure. That’s my mother’s body. It’s my
mother’s hairstyle. When we think about witchcraft, the mother they praised and
worshiped was the Black woman. So, all witchcraft is Black because the
matriarchies that they were praising were all Black women. And it makes sense
because biologically and scientifically, we were the original mothers, right? We
were the original human beings. It makes sense that ancient human beings would
say, okay, this is God. Because that was the source. We were the being that was
giving birth to humankind. So, first there’s that, that all witchcraft is Black.
Second, as a Black woman, living life has always required witchcraft. Magic is
the only reality. Let’s go to our ancestors in Western Central Africa, where you
know most of our ancestors are from. You look at the women there; then you have
the mothers, you have the Iyami, the source of life. They are called the architects
of existence. And you cannot achieve anything without paying homage to them.
There is no Orisha on earth like mother, which they will tell you in Nigeria. You
are not accomplishing anything without, mother. Mother is what brings everyone
here. In Western Central Africa, we were always understood as the physical
vessel of those great mothers and that we are responsible for the magic that keeps
existence going. So, we arrive in the West through enslavement, and we never
stopped doing that magic. We never let go of that magic. That magic became our 
147
way of life. It is what we consider to be Black culture. And it’s what is considered
to be part of Black womanhood. Meet no Black person that hasn’t seen one of
their ancestors. You won’t meet a Black person that hasn’t had a dream about
something that happened, right? It is the norm for us. And so, as Black women,
we are the keepers of that. We’ve always been the keepers of that tradition.276
Iyalosa Osunyemi takes a historical and theological approach to explain an African origin for all
witchcraft. Although indigenous Britons had darker skin than their modern predecessors and did
indeed descend from Africa, whether or not the Venus of Willendorf or other goddesses
worshiped by early Britons were what we might today call ‘Black’ is beyond the scope of this
study.277 Iyalosa Osunyemi’s response, however, reflects the kind of sacralizing of Blackness
that characterizes previously discussed Black religious nationalist groups where the Black man is
God, Jesus is Black, and all the orisa worshipped by Ifá practitioners are Black. As an alternative
to the kind of masculinist sexism in many Black religious nationalist movements, Iyalosa
Osunyemi positions sacrality in the Black woman. One attribute of the woman’s power that she
emphasizes is the ability to give birth which she identifies as a defining characteristic in both
European and African precolonial societies. In Iyalosa Osunyemi’s view, God is a woman
because the womb is where life comes from, and if the original worshiped goddess was Black,
then witchcraft is by extension an honoring of Black women.
By naming the Iyami the architects of existence, Iyalosa Osunyemi refers to the divine
energy of aje in the Yoruba orisa ensemble. According to the Yoruba, aje is a power held by all
women but more powerful in older women and is thought to be able to create or destroy
depending on their wishes. It is often discussed as a bird that lives within, and one must be
276 Iyalosa Osunyemi Akalatunde, Interview by author, Zoom, July 30, 2021.
277 Hannah Devlin and Hannah Devlin Science correspondent, “First Modern Britons Had ‘dark to Black’ Skin,
Cheddar Man DNA Analysis Reveals,” The Guardian, February 7, 2018, sec. Science,
https://www.theguardian.com/science/2018/feb/07/first-modern-britons-dark-Black-skin-cheddar-man-dna-analysisreveals.
148
careful not to upset the bird, or chaos ensues. Although creation can look like childbirth, within
the Yoruba origin stories of the feminine, orisa also create the earth through their power of aje.
278
In Yoruba cosmology, there are 401 Orisha who are thought to protect and aid human
development, including the Egungun/ancestors, one’s Ori, or innate orisa of intuition, and ire or
good fortune. There are also 201 malevolent energies called the Ajogun, of which there are eight
categories such as iku (death), arun (sickness), and ofo (loss). The power of aje lives somewhere
between malevolent and benevolent categories, thus granting them the power of both creation
and destruction. Although the Ajogun cause harm and the orisa assist the living, they do not
represent sharp distinctions between good and evil, rather, they aim to keep balance in our world,
a primary philosophical tenet of the Yoruba belief system.279 Iyalosa Osunyemi spoke to the
power of aje, explaining, “By Black witchcraft, I am talking about the craft of the Black wise
woman, the Black witch, but I’m also talking about, things that we have to do that may be
considered dangerous, to protect ourselves. I’m talking about painful magic. I’m talking about
the magic that our grandmothers used to make sure that they didn’t shoot us all in the streets.”280
As a force of protection, aje is the spiritual power of Black feminism. Religious scholar Montre
Aza Missouri argues, “True aje... are preoccupied with checking those in power and bringing
equality in all facets of social and spiritual life….”281 It is a feminine power of transformation
that cannot be relegated to Christian categories of good and evil but, as Albert Raboteau asserts,
278 Lilith Dorsey, Orishas, Goddesses, and Voodoo Queens: The Divine Feminine in the African Religious
Traditions (Newburyport, MA: Weiser Books, 2020). 33-34.
279 See Gary Edwards and John Mason, Black Gods--Òrìṣà Studies in the New World, Rev. 4th ed ([Brooklyn, N.Y:
Yorùbá Theological Archministry, 1998); Teresa N. Washington, The Architects of Existence: Àjẹ́
in Yoruba
Cosmology, Ontology, and Orature, Revised edition (Orífín, Ilé Àjẹ́
: Ọya’s Tornado, 2018).
280 Iyalosa Osunyemi Akalatunde, Interview by author, Zoom, July 30, 2021.
281 MontreÌ Aza. Missouri, Black Magic Woman, and Narrative Film: Race, Sex, and AfroReligiosity (Palgrave Macmillan, 2015), 52.
149
are instead “categories of security and danger.”282 One crucial facet of an Africana Black
feminist orientation is protecting Black women and femmes from the dangers of patriarchy.
Sometimes, that act is not necessarily considered morally or ethically ‘good’ from a white
Christian perspective. Iyalosa Osunyemi is fully aware that it is Black feminism that contributes
to how she views and shapes Africana religion, particularly in how she understands violence and
safety in religious communities.
When I first got into the religion, when I first got into Isese, it was just as horribly
misogynistic and predatory and terrible. It was not a safe place for Black women
and children. I’m not saying that’s how it is now because it’s getting better. But if
we do not blatantly come out and say, this shit is killing us, you hating us like this
is killing us, then we’re continuing to create unsafe spaces within our religious
traditions. I had to embrace Black feminism to make sure that when I spoke,
everyone knew that I was fighting misogyny in our religious communities and
that my aim is to uplift Black women in abusive situations.
As a scholar, and general wise woman, Iyalosa Osunyemi’s understanding of violence toward
Black women and femmes was influenced by authors such as Audre Lorde, Patricia Hill Collins,
and bell hooks. Because Iyalosa Osunyemi commands such a broad audience and is regarded as a
respected leader, whether novice practitioners have read Black feminist canonical thinkers or not,
they are still being informed by these and other Black feminists’ analysis. Iyalosa Osunyemi’s
framework, however, morphs into a theological understanding of Black feminism, such as aje
and Black women’s sacrality. The merging of the two, Black feminism and an Africana
framework, produces what is now a quickly spreading orientation.
282 Albert J. Raboteau, Slave Religion: The “Invisible Institution” in the Antebellum South, Updated ed (Oxford;
New York: Oxford University Press, 2004), 287.
150
A Queer Standpoint
As an extension of a Black feminist framework, the emerging Black witch movement and
the spaces created from it are Black and profoundly queer. Black witches conceptualize a queer
framework similar to how they conceive multi-religiosity and Black separatism—as a
religiopolitical commitment. They adopt a theological belief system where queer is woven into
the fabric of Africana religiosity. There are two significant ways a queer lens appears within a
Black feminist Africana religious orientation. First, many Black witches and leaders in Black
witch spaces possess queer sexual orientations. Second, because Black witches choose to
practice African-heritage religions, select the nomenclature ‘Black witch,’ and integrate a Black
feminist analysis into their orientation, they embody a queer (or othered) subjectivity that
counters white Western Christian notions of normative identity. Some queer leaders include
Sam, aka Juju Bae, Hess Love, Angel (who takes the stage name Hoodoo Hussy), Laurita Marie,
and Erin, also known as LaReina. It is not circumstantial that these women and femmes claim
multiple identities as queer, witches, and practitioners of African-heritage religious traditions
because—at least in theology and cosmology—Vodou, Ifá, and Lucumí have long celebrated
non-binary, trans, and sexually variant deities such as the gender-bending, rainbow loving, skirtwearing orisa Oshunmare.283
I spoke with Hess Love, a queer, non-binary femme and leader in the Facebook group
The Witches Brew: Indigenous Rootwork and Conjure. They are also the co-founder of the
Chesapeake Conjure Society in Baltimore, Maryland, which organizes social-justice-oriented
283 Randy P. Conner and David Hatfield Sparks, Queering Creole Spiritual Traditions: Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, and
Transgender Participation in African-Inspired Traditions in the Americas (New York: Harrington Park Press,
2004).
151
Hoodoo events like ceremonies to elevate ancestors lost through police violence.284 I asked Hess
Love why they think the emerging Black witch and Hoodoo movement is so queer. They offered
the following response.
I’m a queer person, and when I think about the history of Hoodoo, I think about
how there is no place or space where queer people don’t exist. Our ancestors who
were enslaved may not have always had the ability to be out, or even if they had
the ability, the things they did for pleasure were not always recorded. But we were
always there, especially in Hoodoo. In the Blues, for example, we see this
intersection of sexuality and religion. Many songs are open about being queer,
and many songs are also about Hoodoo. And the religion is very much about how
we utilize Hoodoo in a communal sense. It’s about not leaving other people
behind. So, for me, it’s a very natural iteration of loving Black people, not leaving
each other behind, utilizing what we can to manifest magic, love, money, or
anything that you need. Whether you’re queer or straight or whatever, you have
access to this power. There’s nothing about Hoodoo rituals that say this can only
belong to X, Y, and Z. Whatever restraints we see are things humans have put on
stuff, not the divine entities. The medicine, the plants, and the methodologies are
not predicated on gender or sexuality. I don’t feel like Hoodoo is a place where
queer people must fight for a space for ourselves. We just exist within it. It’s just
living.
285
Hess Love’s response posits Blackness and queerness simultaneously through a Hoodoo
theology and ethic, noting that a communal sense of Hoodoo refuses to leave anyone behind; it
embraces all regardless of gender and sexuality. In Hess Love’s analysis, the divine meets the
political, reflecting a theory similar to E. Patrick Johnson’s notion of a racialized sexuality.
Johnson refutes the white supremacy embedded in common queer theory discourse by proposing
the examination of racialized sexualities through culture, and gender, and class. He maintains
that ‘‘Quare,’’ as opposed to queer studies, “not only speaks across identities, it articulates
284 “Chesapeake Conjure Society,” Hoodoo Society, accessed January 5, 2022,
https://hoodoosociety.com/community.
285 Hess Love, In discussion with author via Zoom, April 23, 2021.
152
identities as well. “‘‘Quare’’ offers a way to critique stable notions of identity and, at the same
time, to locate racialized and class knowledges.”286
If quare studies locates the queer person of color through their social and cultural
orientations, then Hess Love’s analysis of Hoodoo locates the Black queer subject within the
cultural space of Blackness, as well as the religious space of Hoodoo. A Black/queer/Hoodoo
locale forms a political standpoint or a Black witch relationship to, and understanding of, gender
and sexuality. Johnson continues that quare studies “…foregrounds the ways in which lesbians,
bisexuals, gays, and transgender people of color come to sexual and racial knowledge. Moreover,
quare studies acknowledges the different ‘standpoints’ found among lesbian, bisexual, gay, and
transgender people of color—differences that are also conditioned by class and gender.”287
Omise’eke Natasha Tinsley similarly theorizes Black genders and sexualities through the
religion of Vodou.
Like Johnson’s framing of gender and sexuality through a cultural lens featuring group
standpoints, Tinsley looks to engagement with the divine in Haitian Vodou to interpret how
Black people understand their genders and sexualities. Her book examines “Ezili-songs, stories,
spirit possessions, dream interpretations, prayer, flags, paintings, speculative fiction, films, dance
poetry, [and] novels” to theorize Black Atlantic genders and sexualities.288 Tinsley’s subjects
understand their gender through attributes such as the performative femininity of Ezili Freda, or
rage, and lesbian masculinity in Ezili Dantor. Similar to interpretive categories through which
Christian and Muslim Black religious nationalists understand race and racial destiny, religion has
286 Patrick Johnson, “‘Quare’ Studies, or (Almost) Everything I Know About Queer Studies I Learned from My
Grandmother,” Text and Performance Quarterly 21 (January 1, 2001): 1–25,
https://doi.org/10.1080/10462930128119. 3.
287 Ibid.
288 Omise’eke Natasha Tinsley, Ezili’s Mirrors: Imagining Black Queer Genders (Durham: Duke University Press,
2018). 5.
153
the capacity to serve as the framework through which one understands the intersectional
subjectivity of race, gender, and sexuality. Hess Love and many other Black witches interviewed
in my study hold queerness and queer bodies as inseparable from Hoodoo, which they view as a
queer Black feminist politic and practice based on a profound love for Blackness and all Black
people. Their queer political framework also highlights the Black witches’ destabilization of the
nation-state’s investments in heteronormativity, respectability politics surrounding aesthetic
presentation, and monotheistic Christian beliefs and values, especially as related to women’s
subservience to men and supposed biblical damnation of same-sex coupling. In her study of
communities of color living in Europe, Fatima El-Tayeb expands current mainstream
understandings of queer beyond the term’s confinement to variant sexual identities. For ElTayeb, queer “references processes of constructing normative and nonnormative behaviors and
populations.”289 El-Tayeb’s definition of queer helps us recognize that by identifying as Black
witches and constructing religiopolitical discourse—which celebrates variant genders and
sexualities, resists respectability politics, and openly practices religious traditions demonized by
the Christian church—Black women and femmes are choosing to live outside of the nationstate’s normative criteria and, in doing so, healing a variety of collective traumas inflicted by
anti-Blackness.
In New Orleans, I sat down in a Black-owned coffee shop with Kailyn, a young queer
Black astrologer and clairvoyant witch with a smooth shaved head and shimmering orange
eyeshadow. After recognizing her ability to connect with the ancestral realm and after coming
out in a homophobic household, Kailyn left the church where she was raised. I asked Kailyn if
289 Fatima El-Tayeb, European Others: Queering Ethnicity in Postnational Europe (Minneapolis: University of
Minnesota Press, 2011), Xxxv.
154
she found any overlap between the identities of queer and Black witch, to which she affirmed
that the two are very much about living outside socialized norms.
I don’t wake up saying, “I want to break the status quo” in the sense of like, “I
want to wear this thing and be queer.” I wake up and say, “How can I be my most
authentic self to spirit?” And “Spirit protect me, protect my authenticity. Provide
me with prosperity and opportunities to make it through my day.” I’m someone
who deals with depression and anxiety, which most people who are open and
tapped in have to deal with because of a society that is trying to normalize …
being obedient by just working and sleeping, working and sleeping. When you’re
tapped in, you realize that’s actually not the path, and you start realizing how odd
you are to those other people.
For instance, on the first day at one of my restaurant jobs, I peeped somebody
who wasn’t trustworthy with whom I worked an event with years ago. Turns out
he was stealing tips from people at my new job. I told my homie, and he was like,
“Kailyn, I always knew something was wrong with him.” After that, I committed
to intuitively reading people’s astrology charts because I should [be able to make
a career from, and] get paid for this ability.290
For Kailyn, being authentic means the cohabitation of queer and witch in her very being.
Kailyn’s interlocking identity alienated her from the Christian church (which is typically
opposed to queer sexuality) and separated her from normative work environments where she was
exposed to intuitive messages outside her control. Experiences at church and at work were
overwhelming for Kailyn and led her to find employment in a position where she is financially
compensated for her abilities. As an astrologer, she is harnessing her divine power to create
alternative economic systems outside of industry-related jobs that usually perpetuate the
structure of the nation-state. Magic workers like Kailyn are feeding themselves and their Black
families through an alternative economic network predicated on the beliefs and investments of
the Black witch.
290 Kailyn Davillier, In discussion with author. In person- New Orleans., June 25, 2021.
155
Conclusion
Religion has historically provided avenues for change (with outcomes such as community
centers like the praise house, the Black church, or the Yoruba Ile) and internal affirmations of
Blackness through a belief in its sacrality. As Black religious nationalists have taught us, the
political and the spiritual are inseparable. For many Black religious nationalists, Black
separatism was the divine word from God to establish new homes as far as the continent of
Africa or as close as South Carolina. However, rearticulations of divine revelations did not
always include love or acceptance for all Black people.
In the early 21st century, Black witches are reclaiming a full Black community, as it is the
queers, the feminists, and the othered who are shaping a Black feminist Africana religious
orientation. Informed by the Black feminist revolution of the 1980s and 1990s, with the guide of
ancestors like bell hooks, Zora Neale Hurston, Toni Morison, and Audre Lorde, Black witches
are shaping a new framework for Black religiopolitical thought—a Black feminist Africana
religious orientation. As Iyalosa Osunyemi, Sam, Toya, Hess Love, Kailyn, and Daizy note:
Black women and femmes are sacred, separate Black spaces are integral to their wellbeing,
multi-religiosity is often something called upon by the ancestors, and queer practitioners have
always been and will always be here. Black witch discourse not only shapes intercommunal
thought but has the capacity to change popular American spiritual narratives, including those
pertaining to manifestation291 and the prosperity gospel, as explored in the next chapter.
291 Manifestation is a term popularized in American mainstream spiritual discourse that refers to engagement with
one’s thoughts or a divine force to materialize one’s desired outcomes.
156
Chapter Four:
Manifesting Change:
Spiritual Co-Creation and Religiopolitical Thought
In 2006, author Rhonda Bryne released the self-help book The Secret. Selling 30 million
copies, Byrne had clearly written a best seller that was also translated into 50 languages. That
same year director Drew Heriot released the documentary, The Secret, which grossed over $65.6
million in box office sales. Its messaging was uplifting, teaching audiences the art
of manifestation—as in, the manifestation of one’s material, physical, or socially-bound desires.
Bryne and Heriot purported that if one thinks good thoughts, imagines the best scenario and
maintains a positive disposition, one’s thoughts will become a reality. The Secret was one of
many books in a lineage of prosperity gospel, New Thought, and New Age rhetorics, which all
similarly claim that an external force, such as a Christian God, The Universe, or even one’s
thoughts, shapes one’s physical and social reality, including their access to financial resources,
career success, health, and romantic partnerships. Manifestation discourse, however, is often
entangled with toxic social ideologies. The prosperity gospel and New Thought, for example,
often foster capitalist individualism, a characteristic of American colonial and imperial
expansion, disregarding and significantly impairing communal and social power and
relationships while prioritizing private wealth and individual gain above all else.292
This chapter examines how Black witches counter harmful ideologies embedded in
manifestation discourse. I argue that by merging an Africana religious orientation with a Black
292 Bryan S. Turner, “Individualism, Capitalism and the Dominant Culture: A Note on the Debate,” The Australian
and New Zealand Journal of Sociology 24, no. 1 (March 1, 1988): 47–64,
https://doi.org/10.1177/144078338802400103.
157
feminist critique, Black witches construct a notion of spiritual-co-creation that critiques popular
cultural and spiritual approaches to manifestation. Spiritual co-creation is indeed an
interpretation of material manifestation discourse that challenges prosperity gospel, and
aspirational New Age thought, which are frequently entangled with exploitative capitalism or
individualism. It also challenges the false promise that one can shift all economic or social
circumstances with only a positive mindset. Instead, Black witch spiritual co-creation is
inseparable from a contemporary Black feminist anti-capitalist critique invested in an equal
distribution of resources while also remaining rooted in a legacy of African-descended people
using the available spiritual tools—such as herbs employed in magical remedies—to survive,
thrive, and heal from oppressive conditions. Based on a Black feminist and Africana religious
orientation, four core components shape spiritual co-creation: an emphasis on healing, a critique
of capitalism, a commitment to mutual aid, and a sense of deservedness. Spiritual co-creation is
neither a religion nor a ritualistic tool (like tarot) but a set of beliefs that shape practitioners’
engagement with their spiritual practice and subsequently their communities. In this co-creation
process, combining a spiritual petition with tangible strategic actions is essential for Black
witches to develop an internalized faith that inspires the belief that their spiritual practice can
literally provide (or manifest) the resources necessary to meet their material, emotional, and
social needs. As a result, spiritual co-creation transforms internalized notions of inferiority
(derived from repeated denial of basic needs such as housing, financial security, or family and
marriage stability) into long-term self-belief and worth. 
158
The Prosperity Gospel and Capitalist Individualism
The prosperity gospel emerged in the late 19th century after Americans distanced
themselves from the abstaining piety of an early Puritan Protestant Christian theology and
instead took an interest in metaphysical approaches to spirituality. Later examples of prosperity
gospel pedagogues include right-wing preachers such as Kenneth Copeland, Joyce Meyer and
Paula White, as well as African American religious leaders such as TD Jakes and his mostly
Black, tenth largest megachurch, The Potter’s House (in Dallas Texas).293 There is also a
plethora of teachers and leaders who appeal more to people who identify as “spiritual but not
religious.” New Age leaders include Bob Proctor, Deepak Chopra, Louise Hay, and Wayne
Dyer. Practitioners of varying prosperity-based spiritual and religious traditions espouse similar
messages of optimism, positive thoughts, commitments to virtuosity, and beliefs that the more
one gives, the more blessings God will bestow. Kate Bowler argues that the prosperity gospel is
so enmeshed in the American conscious that it lives right alongside a Christian civil religion and
fits seamlessly into the American dream.294
Still, a growing concern associated with prosperity gospel messaging—whether vaguely
spiritual or entirely Christian—is that the messaging disregards structural inequality and
systemic forms of oppression. In The Secret, for example, Heriot and Bryne fail to address how
interpersonal, institutional, and internalized forms of racism, sexism, homophobia, transphobia,
and ableism impede access to an abundant life for people of marginalized identities. When
prosperity gospel and New Age thought leaders purport that thoughts or godly worship are the
only factors influencing one’s circumstances, audiences can blame themselves and their lack of
293 See Shayne Lee, “Prosperity Theology: T.D. Jakes and the Gospel of the Almighty Dollar,” CrossCurrents 57,
no. 2 (2007): 227–236.
294 Kate Bowler, Blessed: A History of the American Prosperity Gospel (New York: Oxford University Press, 2013).
159
religious/spiritual commitment for unfulfilled desires instead of considering external, systemic
impositions. Many versions of the prosperity gospel propose that the path toward upward
mobility actually lies within the individual, or within their ability to – through spiritual and/or
religious practice and commitments – transcend their circumstance, further obscuring the need
for social and government support like Medicaid and Medicare or subsidized public housing and
education. Additionally, prosperity gospel adds to American fears of communism and socialism
by bolstering an individualism historically espoused in nationalist rhetoric during moments like
the Vietnam and Cold War. Church leaders isolate and harm low-income congregations when
they insist members can only cultivate religious belonging by demonstrating faith-based
commitment and consistent financial contributions to churches that deplete their meager
incomes. Prosperity gospel churches are most often led by preachers living much more lavish
lifestyles than their congregations. The disparity between preachers and congregations is
obfuscated by the embraced belief that the more congregants give, the more God will bless them,
and the more visible blessings they have, the more proof that they are chosen and approved by
God for living a virtuous life.
“Will a man rob God? Yet ye have robbed me. But ye say, wherein have we robbed thee?
In tithes and offerings,” chided Pastor Walton of Victorious Faith Center. In sharing Malachi 3:8,
Walton aimed to imply that he was being robbed by his congregation who was not giving enough
in the form of tithes and offerings and would thus experience a curse on their material world as a
result.295 Across congregations, through its spiritual focus on the material world, prosperity
gospel has the potential to encourage a perspective where capitalist hyper-consumerism is divine.
Within a prosperity gospel rhetorical context, the preacher’s luxury cars, vacation homes, and
295 Ibid., 235-236.
160
diamond-studded jewelry are seen as the result of a virtuous life that congregations can emulate
through hard work and religious devotion. More communal forms of prosperity and care become
devalued in place of individualist capitalism, which sets aside the needs of the group in order to
contribute to the opulent personal gain of one leader.296
Because prosperity gospel messaging saturates America’s mainstream media, it is
unsurprising that it has also informed African-heritage religious practitioners’ beliefs about
divine intervention. The rhetoric typically seeps into Black witch discourse by way of two
avenues. First, some Black witches grew up in Black churches like TD Jakes’s The Potter’s
House, where prosperity gospel messaging has remained a prominent discourse since its
founding in 1996.297 Even after leaving Black churches for African-heritage religions some
Black witches—intentionally or unintentionally—internalize most of the learned ideology.
Alternatively, Black witches (including this author) learned prosperity gospel thinking through
New Age popular media such as the book Creative Visualization by Shakti Gawain which
instructs readers to visualize one’s desired result. Still, it is important to note that internalization
is not the only way that Black witches are impacted by prosperity gospel rhetoric. Black witch
communities are impacted by prosperity gospel messaging when clients exhibit a sense of
entitlement when engaging Black witches as spiritual service providers.
As a new wave of interest in Africana religious traditions expands, Black Americans are
increasingly seeking African-heritage spiritual services from expert practitioners. However, New
Age and religious prosperity gospel teachings promoting capitalist ‘get-rich-quick’ frameworks
are so ingrained in the American consciousness that novice seekers frequently exhibit
296 Ibid.
297 See Shayne Lee, “Prosperity Theology: T.D. Jakes and the Gospel of the Almighty Dollar,” CrossCurrents 57,
no. 2 (2007): 227–236.
161
characteristics of toxic manifestation discourse. For instance, clients seeking spiritual services
demand that expert Black witches produce supernatural results with unreasonable expectations
and entitlement. For example, Hess Love (co-founder of the Chesapeake Conjure Society) spoke
with me about how harmful manifestation discourse has affected Hoodoo and Black witch
communities.
I think right now, the biggest threat is how we’ve assimilated. Millennial and gen
Z folks are the most assimilated generations because of racial integration, and so
there are ways that we have absorbed whiteness. Even if there is still de-facto
segregation, we’re able to receive so many more messages through the Internet
that can be fundamentally white and violent or anti-Black.
Many people underestimate how insidious whiteness is and how it can live in
your spirit in certain ways, such as through the microwave mentality where
everybody wants something quick. It’s a form of entitlement and hyperconsumerism. Some people think you must give them something, and they go
about getting it in ways that can be very violent. Maybe they do have a right to it,
but they don’t understand that this person can’t offer it. So, they manipulate the
situation or try to force it instead of looking around.
I am also thinking of people making a business out of Hoodoo. We’re starting to
learn that spiritual occupations deserve to be compensated and have a reciprocal
relationship [with clients]. In so many African and African diasporic traditions,
the marketplace is an entity of thought where an equal exchange is valued.
Exchange is the natural part of our societies and our spiritual structure.
As opposed to other diasporic faiths, Hoodoo is often the trinket you sell out
front. It’s becoming reduced to merely the mojo bag or candle you sell to make
money. But other philosophies are important to Hoodoo that are not reflected. It’s
like, “I’m going to devalue this specific thing because I want to make money, and
I see the entertainment and aesthetic value in it.” This is not uncommon for Black
folks in the U.S. It happens to so many parts of our culture, food, and our music.
It’s a way that whiteness lives inside of us.298
According to Hess Love, clients’ internalized whiteness and capitalist preoccupations shape
interactions with spiritual service providers - a considerable problem within Black witch
networks. Many of my respondents discussed client’s reluctance to pay for spell work, calling
298 Hess Love, in discussion with author, April 23, 2021.
162
late at night when in crisis for divination requests, or after applying minimal effort in the
material realm, blaming the witch when their desire fails to actualize. Entitled engagement is
especially targeted at Hoodoo experts and non-religious spiritual witches because of a lack of
understanding, appreciation, and institutionalization of their tradition and practices. Although
still marginalized, African traditional religions enjoy at least the category of religion, formalized
spaces of worship, and hierarchal structures of leadership. That Ifá, for example, comes from
continental Africa, with established lineages and diasporic counterparts that have been
established for hundreds of years—for example, Lucumí in Cuba— affords the tradition greater
respect.
Hoodoo, on the other hand, is diffuse, non-hierarchal, and often exploited for financial
gain. Because it is a tradition that was intentionally created to meet the needs of Black people
surviving chattel slavery and later Jim Crow segregation (as discussed in Chapter One), there are
countless rituals aimed at ensuring financial prosperity, safety, security in romantic relationships,
and health. It has also been essential that ritual protocol and material supplies be readily
accessible and known to practitioners. And accessibility is precisely what puts Hoodoo at risk for
exploitive practices that separate it from its philosophical beliefs and cosmological orientations
effectively (as Hess Love notes), reducing the tradition to mere ‘trinkets’ that can be sold only to
meet a desired result. Moreover, because most Hoodoo spiritual service providers are women
and femmes, their work – like other mostly femme and domestic labor such as childcare or
housework – is undervalued in a patriarchal and capitalist society.299

Within manifestation discourse, prosperity gospel rhetoric appears much more insidiously
through what, in the 1980s, John Welwood termed “spiritual bypassing.” Welwood defines
299 Based on ethnographic research. 
163
spiritual bypassing as the tendency to “use spiritual ideas and practices to sidestep or avoid
facing unresolved emotional issues, psychological wounds, and unfinished developmental
tasks.”300 He originally conceived the concept based on his involvement in American Buddhist
communities where practitioners were refusing to examine unresolved emotional issues. The
term has evolved to include unrealistic idealism—a commitment to always remaining positive—
and a belief that there are divine reasons for misfortune.301 In the following excerpt of an
interview with Mary Byrd, we see elements of ‘spiritual bypassing.’ Mary is a practitioner of
Egyptian witchcraft, which is more prevalent among white witches who are often culturally
adjacent to New Age rhetoric. Since the early 19th century, whites interested in the occult have
been fascinated with Egyptian beliefs and practices that they deemed exotic and otherworldly.
Because of white appropriation of Egyptian ‘witchcraft,’ the practice has become susceptible to
Western beliefs, such as John Welwood’s observed American phenomenon of spiritual
bypassing.302 For instance, when I inquired about spiritual co-creation, Mary Byrd echoed some
of messaging evident in both white witch communities and New Age thought.
There are four tenants of witchcraft: to know, to will, to dare, to keep silent. 303
1) You must know yourself and know that whatever you desire will come true. You
have to believe it.
2) You must will it into existence or put work behind it.
3) You dare to do a working behind it, such as writing down a petition for $5,000
and burning the paper.
300 John Wellwood, Human Nature, Buddha Nature: On Spiritual Bypassing, Relationship, and the Dharma,
accessed March 2, 2022, https://www.johnwelwood.com/articles/TRIC_interview_uncut.pdf.
301 Ibid.
302 See Helen S. Farley, “Out of Africa: Tarot’s Fascination with Egypt.” Literature & Aesthetics 21, no. 1 (June
2011). Accessed April 15, 2018.
303 A concept of ‘knowing willing and daring’ is popular in Wiccan communities and was popularized by the book
Luciferian Order. See Lucian Black, Luciferian Order: To Know, Dare, Will and Keep Silent (Independently
published, n.d.).
164
4) And then you keep silent. You let it go and don’t tell anybody about it because
you want your magic to work. You don’t want other people going, “that’s not
going to work,” because then they can start to poke holes in your confidence.
For example, if you are trying to co-create a new car, your will is to have the
money to pay for a car. Maybe you need to get a job to make the money to get the
car that you want. You have to do those mundane things to work towards that
goal, but the universe will conspire to help you out. Like maybe you get an
unexpected check for something that you forgot all about. Your daring is to
actually ask for the car from the spirit realm. And the daring is also to do any
herbs, oils, or spells around getting it. Once you do that work, you say, “so mote it
be” and let it go. You let the universe then conspire to bring that to you. It’s the
mundane and then the magic.
We need to see ourselves as co-creators with the universe. The universe is
basically waiting on us. People say, “well, why is this happening to me?” But you
need to see the opportunity, the lesson in it. Not necessarily to pity yourself for it.
It’s waiting around to see what you want to do, and you’re like, “why did this
happen?” and the universe is like, “I don’t know, why did it happen? What did
you do? Did you do something stupid? What happened?” This thinking breaks us
out of that box, and it lets us know that each of us is divine. We are all gods and
goddesses. Our thoughts become things. So, the more we teach that, there’s no
limit to what we can do as witches.304

Although Mary Byrd affirms self-determination, she also encourages practitioners to see
the lessons in misfortune and emphasizes the need to avoid self-pity. When contextualized by
spiritual bypassing, Mary’s statements can be read as disregarding and sidestepping crucial
feelings of grief and lament necessary for healing. Mary also places responsibility on the
individual for an inability to manifest one’s desires when she mentions the universe asking, ‘“…
you’re like, why did this happen?” and the universe is like, “I don’t know, why did it happen?
What did you do? Did you do something stupid? ...’” And through the framing of “our thoughts
become things,” she echoes undercurrents of New Thought messaging. New Thought philosophy
emerged in the late 19th century among contributors such as Phineas Parkhurst Quimby, who
304 Mary Byrd, In discussion with author, April 16, 2021.
165
invented theories of “mind cure,” Mary Baker Eddy, the founder of Christian Science, and the
New Thought theologian Emma Curtis Hopkins. Each contributor emphasized that one’s
thoughts, coupled with prayer and meditation, could transform one’s physical and emotional
health as well as social and financial circumstances.305 New Thought, a prominent philosophy in
the New Age book, The Secret, has significantly influenced the spiritual discourse of millions of
spiritual seekers in the United States, including Mary Byrd, through its widespread presence in
popular media.
As evident in Mary Byrd’s response, it is easy to locate traces of toxic prosperity gospel
rhetoric within Black witch thought. The difficulty lies in parsing it out from more holistic
messaging such as co-creation which encourages Black women and femmes to both take action
in their earthly lives and petition for support. In the religions of West and West-Central Africa,
particular orientations shape how practitioners understand divine intervention, such as beliefs in
ancestor support and animated efficacious objects that produce desired results. Most Black
witches I interviewed interpreted spiritual co-creation through this Africana framework.
Africana Religious Co-Creation
When Black witches enter African-heritage religions, they also adopt African-originated
beliefs and practices pertaining to divine intervention. Like other shared religious orientations, as
noted within the African Religious Complex, such as a belief in ancestor veneration or
reincarnation, an Africana approach to divine intervention shares similar West and West-Central
African characteristics.306 Therefore, as Black witches adopt disparate African religions—
305 See John S. Haller, The History of New Thought: From Mind Cure to Positive Thinking and the Prosperity
Gospel, Swedenborg Studies 21 (West Chester, Pa: Swedenborg Foundation Press, 2012).
306 The African Religious Complex is discussed at length in Chapter One. 
166
whether to the extent of initiation or merely through superficial familiarity— they still assume a
similar orientation, regardless of religion of choice. Two prominent regions affecting Black
witches’ understanding of divine intervention are the pre-colonial kingdom of the Kongo, which
heavily influenced Hoodoo’s development, and Nigeria, which is the birthplace of Yoruba orisa
traditions, which Black witches mostly adopted through Black religious nationalism.
Many of the enslaved Africans arriving in the Americas came from what was previously
the pre-colonial kingdom of the Kongo and brought with them their religious traditions. In the
South Carolina Low Country alone—a region rich in Hoodoo—between 1700 and 1740, sixtyfive percent of imported Africans of known origin were from the Kongo-Angola area. This
number remained at around fifty percent until the prohibition of the importation of enslaved
Africans in 1808.307 Despite influences from Africans of other regions, what emerged in the
Americas was a Hoodoo tradition that became anchored in cosmological orientations from the
Kongo and ambient West-Central African cultures.
In the pre-colonial kingdom of the Kongo—or what is now the Republic of the Congo,
northern Angola, and the western portion of the Democratic Republic of Congo—divine
intervention could be explained best through the Kongo cosmogram or Dikenga. The Kongo
cosmogram represents the interconnection between the worlds of the living and the dead while
also serving as a symbol for a Kongo cultural worldview. It reflects the Kongo people’s beliefs
in the presence of their ancestors, the importance of maintaining balance and harmony, and the
relationship between the human and divine realms. As depicted in Figure 1, the Kongo
cosmogram is represented by a cross with four distinct points and expresses rotation in a
counterclockwise motion. The space above the horizontal line, the Kalunga line, represents the
307 Jason R. Young, Rituals of Resistance: African Atlantic Religion in Kongo and the Lowcountry South in the Era
of Slavery (Baton Rouge: Louisiana State University Press, 2011), 33.
167
world of the living, and the space below encompasses the world of the dead. Each point signifies
a period in a person’s life and death cycle. Kala is the term used for birth, and as one grows, one
reaches tukula or maturity, and then as one grows into old age, one reaches luvemba or death.
After passing through the three stages of life, one descends through similar stages in the spiritual
realm. There one achieves a form of maturity, musoni, before reincarnating in the world of the
living.308

TUKULA
 MUSONI
Figure 2: Kongo Cosmogram
Adapted from Ras Michael Brown’s
African-Atlantic Cultures and the South Carolina Lowcountry309
Kimbwandende Kia Bunseki Fu-Kiau claims that according to Kongo belief, “A human
being’s life is a continuous process of transformation, a going around and around…The human
being is kala-zima-kala, a living-dying-living-being. A being of continuous motion through four
308 Fu-Kiau Kimbwandènde Kia Bunseki. Tying the Spiritual Knot: African Cosmology of the Bântu-Kôngo:
Principles of Life & Living (Brooklyn, NY: Athelia Henrietta Press, 2000), 17-43.
309 Ras Michael Brown, African-Atlantic Cultures and the South Carolina Lowcountry (Cambridge: Cambridge
Univ Press, 2014). 96.
LUVEMB
A
KALA
168
stages of balance between a vertical force and a horizontal force.”310 The spirit not only
repeatedly ‘lives’ and ‘dies’ in the physical realm but also in the realm of the dead. Like how
one reaches a state of maturity in the living realm at tukula, the spirit also reaches a form of
maturity represented by musoni in the world of the dead. When a spirit enters the land of the
dead, they become a Simbi, which is an entity that can assist the living and is often housed in
natural elements such as rocks, caves, or fields of grass. The attributed origins for the simbi vary.
Some spirits are said to have been ‘born’ in the land of the dead, while others are understood to
have once lived on the earthly plane and, through a process of reincarnation, became simbi.
Because spirits reincarnate many times in the land of the dead, the simbi are often ancient
energies living and dying in the world below.311 Through a process of veneration, those on the
earthly plane co-create with the Simbi to affect daily life. In his detailed study of the simbi in the
Kongo and the South Carolina Lowcountry, Ras Michael Brown contends, “In the most
fundamental sense of its meaning, the word simbi evokes a conceptualization of the energy or
power that supports the existence and development of all life. …their role in protecting,
preserving, and supporting people who honor them, elevated them to the ultimate guardians of
the land and people…. ‘The Simbi are found wherever people dwell. Their duty is to assist
man.’”312
In Kongo, there are also ritual objects that assist the living. The spiritual world, the
simbi, and any entities below the Kalunga line help animate and infuse ritual objects with their
efficacious power. Practitioners refer to animated objects as nkisi (plural minkisi or bakisi) which
310 Ibid., 35.
311 Ibid., 98.
312 Ibid., 113-114.
169
are comprised of metaphoric and metonymic items to achieve the desired result. Nsemi Isaki
defines nkisi as,
…the name of the thing we use to help a person when that person is sick and from
which we obtain health; the name refers to leaves and medicines combined
together… It is…called nkisi because there is one to protect the human soul and
guard it against illness for whoever is sick and wishes to be healed. Thus, a nkisi
is also something which hunts down illness and chases it away from the body.313
For the people of the Kongo, a nkisi represents the cosmogram in miniature. It speaks to the
world of the dead by invoking its powers through spiritual invocation and by employing
metaphoric and metonymic items.
Robert Farris Thompson describes a nkisi that contains rocks and feathers, which
symbolize the two upper and lower spheres of the Kongo cosmogram.
Feathers in Kongo connote ceaseless growth as well as plentitude. So, if
the earth within the charm affirms the presence of a spirit from the dead –
from the underworld - feathers capping the charm suggest a connection
with the upper half of the Kongo cosmogram which represents the world
of the living and the empyrean habitat of God.314
Thompson examines another nkisi-inspired charm, or prenda, in Cuba that represents the four
moments of the sun or the four points in the Kongo cosmogram. Before adding material items to
a prenda, practitioners insist that “first one draws a cross, in chalk or white ashes, at the bottom
of the kettle…” Then the nganga proceeds to place symbolic items at the four corners, such as “a
piece of sugarcane filled with seawater, sand, and mercury, stopped with wax so that the nkisi
will always have life, like the flow of quicksilver, so that it will be swift and moving, like the
waters of the ocean, so that the spirit of the charm can merge with the sea and travel far
away.”315
313 Quoted in Robert Farris Thompson, Flash of the Spirit (New York: Vintage Books, 1984), 117.
314 Ibid., 121.
315 Quoted in Ibid., 122.
170
Because the nkisi can create change in someone’s life, it is believed to be alive.
The nkisi has life; if it had not, how could it heal and help people? But the life of a
nkisi is different from the life in people. It is such that one can damage its flesh
(koma mbizi), burn it, break it, or throw it away, but it will not bleed or cry out…
nkisi has an inextinguishable life coming from a source.316
The principle of aliveness is fundamental in the formation of the nkisi. According to
anthropologist Wyatt MacGaffy, the term nkisi is linked “…etymologically to Central African
words often translated as ‘spirit.’ Such a translation captures an important feature of minkisi, that
they are local habitations and embodiments of personalities from the land of the dead, through
which the powers of such spirits are made available to the living.” In other words, there is a
spiritual entity within the nkisi that enables it to support the living.
As noted in Chapter One, the mojo or gris-gris bags used in Hoodoo derives from nkisi
traditions in West-Central Africa and other similar traditions in other parts of West Africa.
317
Like the nkisi, which is believed to possess a spirit that must be fed and venerated to achieve the
desired result, the mojo bag requires the same attention. Mojo bags also incorporate elements
that affect desired results through metaphoric or metonymic significance. The Hoodoo
practitioner will gather plants with particular metaphysical properties, such as rose to bring in
love or chamomile for luck, ‘personal concerns’ like hair, nail clippings, or dead skin cells to
signal to whom the action is directed, and occasionally rocks or roots that carry significance.
Personal concerns can even include a departed ancestor’s human remains meant to connect the
charm to the spiritual realm. The combined elements are placed in a containable object such as a
316 Ibid., 117.
317 See Chireau, Yvonne Patricia. Black Magic: Religion and the African American Conjuring Tradition. Berkeley,
CA: University of California Press, 2006; Jason R. Young, Rituals of Resistance: African Atlantic Religion in Kongo
and the Lowcountry South in the Era of Slavery (Baton Rouge: Louisiana State University Press, 2011), Theophus
Harold Smith, Conjuring Culture: Biblical Formations of Black America (New York: Oxford University Press,
1994). Suzanne Blier argues that some practices thought to derive from the Kongo can also be traced to other West
African religious cultures, including Dahomean and Ewe traditions. See Suzanne Preston Blier, African Vodun: Art,
Psychology, and Power (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1996).
171
clay pot, ceramic jar, or, most frequently, cloth. Charms are sometimes bound with rope to
signify attachment or entanglement, such as keeping a lover faithful.318
In Harry Middleton Hyatt’s massive five-volume collection of over 1600 interviews of
Blacks in the American Southeast, one finds mojo bag instructions intended for all sorts of
concerns such as preventing law enforcement from entering a person’s home, gambling luck, or
keeping a spouse loyal. For instance, one interviewee in Hyatt’s collection shares a prescription
to attract a romantic lover. They instruct mixing: one-part Goofer Dust, one part dried rose
petals, and one part grounded John the Conqueror root and to “Place the articles in a small bag
with a string on each end of the bag to meet around the waist or carry in one’s pocket.”319
Another love mojo instructs the practitioner to carry a red conjure bag filled with gentian root
chips, two herbs associated with love such as rosebud, queen Elizabeth root, or lavender, the
desired lover’s name, and a piece of their hair.320
Conjure bags were also employed throughout the South by enslaved African Americans
to protect them from the violent climate and conditions of chattel slavery. They helped people
escape bondage, kept families together, and prevented enslavers from inflicting forms of brutal
punishment like whippings. Louis Hughes, a bondman, living on plantations in Mississippi and
Tennessee, describes the importance of conjure bags for protection.
It was custom in those days for slaves to carry voo-doo bags. It was handed from
generation to generation, and though it was one of the superstitions of a barbarous
ancestry, it was still generally tenaciously held by all classes. I carried a little bag
which I got from an old slaver who claimed it had the power to prevent anyone
who carried it from being whipped. It was made of leather and contained roots,
318 Chireau, Yvonne Patricia. Black Magic: Religion and the African American Conjuring Tradition (Berkeley, CA:
University of California Press, 2006). 44-52.
319 Marcelitte L. Failla, “Sorcerer of Knowledge -Spell Book.” Marcelitte Failla. Accessed March 31, 2021.
https://www.marcelittethethird.com/spell-book.
320 Catherine Yronwode, Hoodoo Herb and Root Magic: A Materia Magica of African American Conjure
(Forestville, CA: Lucky Mojo Curio, 2002), 102.
172
nuts, pines, and some other things… Many of the servants were thorough
believers in it… and carried these bags all the time.321
After slavery’s abolition, African Americans migrating North continued to use the mojo
bag’s power to create positive change in their lives. Blacks were no longer someone’s property
within the institution of slavery but instead were now forced to navigate systems like Jim Crow
segregation and sharecropping in the South and economic and racial discrimination in the North.
A primary concern for the newly freed population was creating a dignified livelihood with
securities like adequate employment and homes in safe neighborhood. Hoodoo was an enduring
resource in achieving those ends.322
Anthropologist and novelist Zora Neale Hurston’s extensive research on Hoodoo in the
American South illustrates some of the concerns Black people addressed when invoking powers
in the spiritual realm. One of the most frequent spells she came across was for gambling luck.
Hurston’s research covered the 1930s and 40s, right in the middle of the American Great
Depression and World War II, when securing work for African Americans was almost
impossible, or when possible, yielded meager wages. People turned to gambling as an internal
structure of resource distribution within Black communities.323 Due to his financial need, one of
Hurston’s respondents expressed a desire for gambling luck in a prayer request.
Supplicant: Great Goddess of Chance, I would ask your favor. …when I set me
down among the selectmen and play with them the game of cards, you do not put
321 Quoted in Katrina Hazzard-Donald, Mojo Workin: The Old African American Hoodoo System (University of
Illinois Press, 2013), 66.
322 Many respondents in Harry Middleton Hyatt’s collection claim Hoodoo was effective in helping them acquire
economic resources. For example, in Chapter One of this dissertation, a man referred to as ‘the Prophet’ notes how
Hoodoo/Witchcraft helped his client receive employment. Harry Middleton Hyatt, Hoodoo - Conjuration -
Witchcraft - Rootwork, Beliefs Accepted By Many Negroes and White Persons These Being Orally Recorded Among
Blacks and Whites, vol. 5, 5 vols., Alma Egan Hyatt Foundation (New York, N.Y.) (Washington, DC: Hannibal,
Mo., 1970). 4679.
323 Ivan Light, “Numbers Gambling Among Blacks: A Financial Institution.” American Sociological Review 42, no.
6 (1977): 892. doi:10.2307/2094575.
173
into my hand the card which will undo my opponents. Tell me, O great Goddess
of Chance, what can I do to appease your anger and win your approving smile?
The God: My son, you have asked a great favor of me, but you have not burned
any incense at my altar and have not made any offering to my spirit. For I look
only on those who are my steadfast worshippers. For those who come for a day, I
know them not, neither do I smile on them. But for those who worship, I smile on
them; for those of good spirit, I love them.
So, if you wish to carry my favor, you will put into a small bag made of the skin
of chamois the following holy articles: the Grains of Paradise, the powder of the
root called John the Conqueror, the powder of the Magnetic Stone, the Eye of the
Eagle, the tooth of a shark. These you will close together tightly so that they
cannot break out, and on the day you care to win, you will put on this bag the
extract Hasnohannal and keep it in your left-hand pocket and let no one touch it
except the money you will wager on the games so that it will multiply and
grow.324
‘The God’ - or possibly the root-worker - instructs the supplicant to assemble a mojo bag to
bring luck in gambling. 325 The ingredients include: Grain of Paradise, a common Hoodoo plant
for luck and gambling, High John the Conqueror, which is a root that—according to African
American folklore—encompasses High John’s power—High John being an African prince sold
into American slavery who resisted bondage and vowed to protect African descendants—and
Magnetic Sand, which is used alongside the Lodestone to attract the desired result. Practitioners
would then combine the items with the eye of the eagle and a shark’s tooth (which could be
literal or metaphorical versions). When placed in the goat or antelope chamois’ skin, it will bring
the client luck, as each element has metaphoric and metonymic significance symbolizing power,
luck, attraction, protection, and strength.
324 Zora Hurston, “Hoodoo in America.” The Journal of American Folklore 44, no. 174 (1931): 317.
doi:10.2307/535394, 328-329.
325 It is unclear who ‘God’ is in this conversation. The person responding to the supplicant instructing them on how
to compile a mojo bag is most likely the rootworker the client went to see, but also named is the ‘Great Goddess of
Chance’ who was initially petitioned. Mojo bags possess life energy after being invoked by a spiritual leader and
must be fed and appeased. The Goddess of Chance could be a spiritual force within the mojo bag, could refer to the
Christian God, as many Hoodoo practitioners were also Christian, or the supplicant could be speaking to the
ancestors who were frequently petitioned with requests. 
174
The previously quoted passage also illustrates a critical theological principle in
Hoodoo—reciprocity. Manifesting desirable results is not possible without consistent reverence
for the divine realm. Divine veneration takes different forms, including food offerings, prayers,
or a simple inclination toward gratitude. In Hurston’s passage, the supplicant petitioned the Great
Goddess of Chance but did not give anything in return or show consistent devotion. The God
concludes with a stern warning to the supplicant to continue faith after the favor is complete. The
God asserts, “For the day you cease to worship me will be your loss. And the day you cease to
love me will be your doom, for all things I have given I will take away. I am a true mistress and
shower my favors on them, and for those who love me for a while and forsake me, I am a hard
mistress and cause them deep sorrow and dissolution.”326 In Hoodoo, practitioners must remain
humble, loyal, and give offerings to spiritual entities such as the ancestors or the mojo bag. An
Africana religious principle of reciprocity is an important tenet that shapes how Black witches
co-create with the spiritual realm, especially how they engage with their ancestors.
In Bedford-Stuyvesant Brooklyn, Angel, who goes by the stage name Hoodoo Hussy in
her burlesque work, sat with me in a community garden she helps cultivate to discuss the power
in Hoodoo. I asked Angel how working with the spiritual realm has bettered her life.
Using herbs, oils, and roots in my petitions, prayers, and manifestation work is
incredible. I genuinely don’t think I could be in such a good place without those
spiritual resources.
Since I’ve gotten more tuned in, so much of what I’ve wanted has manifested
right in front of my eyes, such as a career change. I was like, “I really want to do
this, but where am I gonna get the resources? And I found the money or more like
the money found me. I take a step, and then my ancestors would push me two
steps forward. My road has been so open. Sure, you can get things done yourself,
but why, when you have all of this natural power. It’s also a reciprocal
relationship. Go into the forest, talk to your ancestors, give them fresh water,
326 Ibid., 329.
175
liquor, tobacco, food, or whatever they’re asking for. It’s a symbiotic
relationship.327
Angel references items used in mojo bags such as petitions, roots, and oils and speaks to
the importance of the co-creative process in Hoodoo. She expresses a belief that – through a
practice of consistent communing – the ancestors meet the practitioner’s tangible action with
divine spiritual assistance. While many might empathize or identify with Angel’s lack of passion
for her previous job, not all would as easily switch careers to focus on building a business
centering spirituality, nutrition, and food history. While some might associate the shift with a
kind of fearlessness, it is important to note that Angel specifically associates the shift with a
consistent petitioning of, co-creation with, and faith in her ancestors and spiritual tools as a
Black witch. Like Mary Byrd, Angel describes spiritual co-creation, but instead of Mary’s
European adjacent witchcraft, Angel does so within a West and West-Central African religious
framework.328 Moreover—similar to Zora Neale Hurston’s interviewee, who noted that if one
has not “made any offering,” then it is unlikely that blessings will occur—Angel emphasizes
reciprocity in Hoodoo. For Angel, it is a reciprocal relationship in which a practitioner must give
offerings to one’s divine spirit guides as a process of exchange.
Although Angel’s theology is anchored in Hoodoo/Kongo spirituality, due to shared
religious characteristics across West and West-Central Africa, devotional practices like
providing offerings in exchange for divine blessings are also prominent within Ifá/Orisa
traditions. Ifá /Orisa practitioners offer plant-based food, the blood or ase of an animal, and
many hours of time and resources dedicated to orchestrating a ceremony as expressions of
gratitude for ancestors’ and deities’ blessings. For the Yoruba, the ancestors are directly
327 Angel HoodooHussy, in discussion with author, May 14, 2021.
328 Angel’s reference to going into the forest to talk to one’s ancestors also reflects some of the pre-colonial Kongo
devotional practices related to the Simbi, which dwell in the natural world. 
176
interested in the outcome of their descendants’ lives because they are invested in the family line
continuing in a positive direction. When the dead’s descendants are healthy, happy, and living
plentiful lives, their state of abundance positively impacts the family line, fostering prosperity in
future generations. Oriki, or praise poems, venerate ancestral heritage, illustrate the importance
of familial lineage, describe family members, and highlight accomplishments. Older women
often recite the oriki to younger generations to instill family pride and to call upon ancestors to
support the living. Yet this tradition, too, encompasses a reciprocal dynamic. It is up to the
descendants to make good choices and enact deeds positively representing the ancestral lineage.
Yoruba scholar S. O. Babayemi describes the egungun (ancestors) as,
…lineage-based, and the lineage is the grassroots of the Yoruba economic, social
and political activities. Thus, a man depends on the lineage land for his economic
activity and depends on lineage elders for sponsorship to get a spouse and the
lineage support to get a recommendation for any political office. The fact that the
lineage is believed to be a communion of the ancestors and their survivors on
earth and that the ancestors are the watchdogs of lineage morality make it
compulsory for every member of the lineage to promote the good image of the
lineage.329
Like in kinship dynamics, children rely on parents for support and resources, but it is vital that to
remain in good favor, one offers respect and reverence to their family in return.330
Because family lineage is so essential, the Yoruba honor their ancestors through a yearly
masquerade between May and July that can last up to a month. During the festival, egungun
priests trained in funerary rites and ancestral communication adorn themselves in elaborate cloth
designed to connect to the spirit realm. Festival costumes consist of two layers. The first layer
covers the priest in a white and indigo material that closely resembles the cloth used to wrap the
dead. The white and indigo cloth covers the entire priest’s body, including a net over his eyes so
329 Ibid., 40.
330 S. O. Babayemi, Egungun Among the Oyo Yoruba. (University of Ibadan, 1980). 
177
that his identity is not disclosed.331 The second layer is much more decorative and elaborate,
representing family lineage and prestige. It consists of strips of brightly colored fabric
embellished with embroidery and small mirrors to catch glimpses of the spirit realm. The
ancestors then mount the priests as they dance in a spinning motion.332 On the first day, sacrifices
such as rams, bean pudding, roosters, and snails are prepared. On the much anticipated second
day, the egungun parade throughout the town, arriving at different villages to receive offerings
and grant blessings. Their blessings include good health, children, material success, and they also
act to stop malicious intent from any community members.333
However, among the Yoruba, it is not only the ancestors that bestow blessings. An entire
community of deities called the orisa are relied upon for daily needs such as love, fertility, a
good harvest, victory in war, and other forms of material success, protection, and healing.
Each orisa from their particular area of governance offers gifts to their devotees. Ogun,
the orisa of war and iron, ensures safe passage on dangerous roads, grants victory over one’s
enemies, and helps prevent appliances from breaking down as the ruler of technology. Oya, the
deity of the wind, the marketplace, and the dead, when petitioned for change, like a tornado, does
not make minor incremental adjustments to one’s life but uproots the very foundation, shaking
all that is familiar, promising lasting transformation for Her devotees. Yemoja is the great mother
of fish, the supreme and oldest deity, ruler of rivers for the Yoruba, and queen of the ocean for
Her diaspora. She abounds abundance in riches and family, assists the birthing process, raises
children, and heals the sick.334 J.D.Y. Peel’s study of the missionary-based Christian conversion
331 Egungun priests are most often men.
332 “Egungun.” – Works – Michael C. Carlos Museum, Emory University, (Accessed March 31, 2021.
https://collections.carlos.emory.edu/objects/8346/egungun;jsessionid=E888A9D3C75BDEFD2B85F8C3C5B15368)
333 S. O. Babayemi, Egungun Among the Oyo Yoruba. (University of Ibadan, 1980), 29-40.
334 Luisah Teish, Jambalaya: The Natural Woman’s Book of Personal Charms and Practical Rituals (San Francisco:
Harper & Row, 1988) 115-137.
178
process in early to mid-19th century Yoruba-speaking areas of modern-day Nigeria notes that
some orisa devotees believed the orisa provided in ways the newly introduced Christian god was
unable. Peel conveys an account of a Christian missionary who tries to persuade a Yoruba
woman to believe in Jesus. He writes, “After he [the missionary] has spoken about Jesus as the
means to the Living God and happiness in the world to come, the woman replies that it is not
[Jesus] that gives children, but only Obatala. She does not care for eternal life but asseverates in
a loud voice “ommo re mo o nfe (children is what I want), repeating it so heartily as if to make
her wish come true.”335 For the Yoruba, the orisa are intrinsic to wellbeing in all areas of life,
including one’s romantic relationships.
For cases of love, fertility and sensuality devotees turn to Osun, freely giving ebo
(offerings), oriki (praise poems), and dances to call on her energy and to bring about a desired
result. In Nigeria, an annual nine-day festival is held in Osogbo,336 honoring the deity and asking
for her blessings in the following year. On the opening day ceremony, participants light 16
candles and perform honorary dances to each orisa. A massive feast occurs on the second day,
and on the remaining days, sacrifices are made and offered to the deities.337 The popular story
associated with the festival’s origins is that Larooye Gbadewolu, an ancient ruler, sometime in
the 14th century, arrived at Osun’s home river while he and his subjects were looking for fertile
land. Osun complained that they were disturbing her peace. Gbadewolu and his subjects thus
decided to move a few miles away and honor Osun through an annual festival in exchange for
“her promise to protect them, ward off enemies, heal the sick and bless infertile wombs.”338
335 J. D. Y. Peel, Religious Encounter and the Making of the Yoruba (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 2000),
91.
336 Osogbo is the capital of the Osun State in southwest Nigeria.
337 Titus A Ogunwale, “Osun Festival.” African Arts 4, no. 4 (1971): 61-62. doi:10.2307/3345887, 61.
338 Bode Omojola, “Òṣogbo: Power, Song and Performance in a Yoruba Festival.” Ethnomusicology Forum 20, no.
1 (2011): 79-106. doi:10.1080/17411912.2011.549360, 81.
179
At the 2006 Osun festival in Oshogbo, one participant, Mama Omileye, attests to Osun’s
abundance. She proclaims,
The main significance of the festival is to thank Osun for her deeds last year: to
appeal to her to guide us in our decision. The path of the river goddess is that of
joy. There is no problem that Osun cannot solve, as willed by God. Osun heals all
ailments, including barrenness. We are the children of Osun. When we die, we
will all go back to Osun. The children that Osun gives us are good ones. My God
never gives us bad children. When we thank her, she blesses us anew.339
Mama Omileye emphasizes that Osun, who governs fertility, will provide the community with
children. When the community thanks Osun by orchestrating the festival and providing offerings,
she continues to bless them.
Black witches who are practitioners of Ifá /Orisa traditions tend to understand spiritual
co-creation through the lens of the orisa’s divine intervention. For instance, when I asked
burlesque performer and Ifá initiate Laurita about feminine energy, sexuality, and the ability to
manifest desired results, she discussed Osun and her personal journey in co-creation.
When I think about feminine power and manifestation, I think of Osun and
the power that lies in between those stars and being able to manifest things
through sex. The yoni is so powerful, from being able to carry a child or
even an ability to create artistically or financially. The connection that we
have as women and those of us with feminine energy is powerful, which
explains why the patriarchy is afraid of it.340
Laurita understands spiritual co-creation through Osun because she is a deity who bestows
blessings and because her feminine energy is tied to creation. Like Iyalosa Osunyemi, mentioned
in Chapter Three, aje is the power of both creation and destruction, and Osun, according to
Yoruba origin stories, is a founding deity of this power. Laurita also mentions sex magic which
might be a newer concept— possibly picked up by Laurita from various spiritual practitioners,
339 Quoted in Ibid., 84.
340 Laurita Marie, in discussion with author, June 23, 2021.
180
such as the 19th century occultist Paschal Beverly Randolph.341 However, because she is not only
a devotee but rather a leading member of the Ifá/Orisa community in New Orleans, Laurita
privileges an Africana religious orientation in her views on spiritual co-creation.
An Africana religious orientation adds nuance to some of the prosperity gospel rhetoric
prominent in the West. Instead of a preacher or New Age self-help leader requesting money,
Black witches engage in a relationship with Black deities and ancestors who are directly
interested in the practitioner’s desired outcomes. Through divine engagement, Black witches
cultivate and embody Africana religious principles of reciprocity, life in spiritually imbued
objects, and the power of feminine energy. In this way, Black witches’ Africana religious
approach to spiritual co-creation circumvents some of the devaluing messages ascribed to Black
women and femmes, helping them heal internalized notions of unworthiness.
Healing and Spiritual Co-Creation
Emotional and psychological healing is often missing in prosperity gospel and New Age
rhetoric. In popular books like Joel Austin’s, I Declare! 31 Promises to Speak Over Your
Life and Shakti Gawain’s Creative Visualization, prosperity gospel and New Age authors only
provide a superficial treatment of internal wellbeing. Instead of addressing structural or
ancestral/transgenerational issues—such as alcoholism caused by excessive poverty and racism
affecting future generations’ mental health—their analyses merely rest on ensuring that their
audiences are thinking positive thoughts. In I Declare!, for example, Austin asks his readers to
affirm to themselves, “I have a sound mind filled with good thoughts, not thoughts of defeat…
341 Paschal Beverly Randolph, Eulis!: The History of Love : The Wondrous Magic, Chemistry, Rules, Laws, Modes,
Moods and Rationale; Being the Third Revelation of Soul and Sex. Also, Reply to “Why Is Man Immortal?” The
Solution of the Darwin Problem. An Entirely New Theory (S.l.: Kessinger Publishing, 2004).
181
My thoughts are guided by God’s Word, every day. No obstacle can defeat me because my mind
is programmed for victory.”342 In my field research Black witches similarly echoed the need for
thinking positively. However, they also emphasized that it is nearly impossible to believe in
future possibility without healing generations of past ancestral trauma. Their beliefs and critical
reflections evidence that they recognize that issues such as depression, substance abuse, anxiety,
or repeated toxic relationships result from generations of structural inequality and racially
motivated violence. To heal consequent mental health effects, one must elevate ancestors
targeted by such violence.
At the first annual Detroit Hoodoo Festival, held in Detroit, Michigan, I spent time with
spiritual life coach and anti-violence facilitator Alexis Douglass. Alexis uses astrology and
ancestor mediumship as a spiritual service provider to help clients heal generational trauma.
I am a personal transformation coach, and I help guide people through
reprogramming their trauma so they can manifest the life they want. I work with
astrology and the moon because she [the moon] governs our emotional waters,
and I help clients develop language and understandings of their emotional and
mental feelings and physical sensations. And then, we do work to align those so
they match because physical sensation stimulates emotional responses and
emotional responses stimulate thoughts. It’s a loop. Or what we call being
triggered. When it’s intergenerational trauma, physical sensations are not your
own, but when you live with them for so long, it’s hard to know that they’re not
yours. And so, we do the work of separating your awareness from those
ancestrally derived responses, and then figure out what to do with it.
For instance, I had, a client who had a deceased mother who did sex work, but not
by her choosing, more because it was a colonized island and indigenous women
were forced into this position. Because she did sex work on a colonized island,
her baby can’t connect, she can’t soften to her man who loves her and she grew
defensive like she had to be an independent woman. And this wasn’t coming from
her need for survival, but more because her mother had been violated more than
one time and had to shut off a certain part of herself because it was unsafe. So, I
worked with this client to unravel that, and elevate that ancestor.
342 Joel Osteen, I Declare: 31 Promises to Speak over Your Life (New York: FaithWords/Hachette Book Group,
2013).
182
Or if you have a problem with alcohol because an ancestor had problems with
alcohol when you elevate your ancestor that had the alcoholism, after that is done
you’re no longer an alcoholic. You’re not always an alcoholic just a person that
don’t drink. You won’t have to fight the compulsive aspect of it anymore.343
I shared with Alexis that my grandmother married a man who became addicted to alcohol and it
caused serious problems in our family linage. Alexis told me,
She probably got some shame. If he had rage fits, she probably never felt valued
enough or special or desired. So, in those moments, when you’re feeling lonely or
if somebody says something to you and you think to yourself, “why did that hurt
my feelings so bad?” you would pray for her [your grandmother] to know that it’s
not her. Pray for her to know that that says something about them, not about her.
And that she is perfect and beautiful and fine and all those things. By healing her
then you only got to deal with your life after that.
When you finally let go of the trauma that is not yours, you get to have a wider
range of positive experiences and create a life based on what you believe is
possible.344
Ancestor elevation repeatedly came up when discussing connections between spiritual cocreation and healing. As Alexis highlights, it is nearly impossible to create the life one desires
when ancestral trauma—such as co-dependency, shame, or intimacy issues— blocks
actualization, making cycles of relived and recreated trauma.
Healing is also an essential component in Black witches’ cultivation of feelings of
deservedness. After centuries of being denied access to economic and social resources due to
anti-Blackness, some African Americans find it difficult to believe they deserve a life of
abundance, joy, and ease. Sam, also known as Juju Bae, addressed this issue directly when I
asked her about spiritual co-creation.
343 Alexis Douglas, In discussion with author, April 18, 2021.
344 Ibid.
183
The big part of manifestation work is that you really must know that you deserve
something to manifest it. If you don’t think that you deserve money, a nice house,
comfortable clothes, how can you properly do manifestation work to bring that
thing in. Particularly for Black people. I think we’re behind on what we think we
should have because people have told us we don’t deserve sh*t.
I remember I went on a date with this guy from Baltimore, and if you want to
know about Black people not having resources, you can just look at Baltimore. I
asked him, “if you could have anything that you wanted without money being a
concern, what would you have?” And he said, “I don’t know. There’s no point in
even dreaming that because I will never have it.”
That was heartbreaking to me. How are we supposed to manifest if we think
there’s no point ‘cause I’ll never have it? We can’t. That’s what manifestation
work is for me. It’s building the foundation of ‘you deserve baby.’ You got to
know that first, then let’s get to the candles or the spells.345
Within white supremacy, frameworks of deserving often encourages white people to believe that
they are entitled to access what is not rightfully theirs. Entitlement shaped early settler notions of
manifest destiny and the ensuing colonial invasion of Indigenous land across the Americas as
well as future generations of imperialism throughout the globe. European conquest depended on
the exploitation of Black and brown people to acquire global resources while repeatedly denying
people of color access to fundamental human rights such as quality housing, financially wellcompensated employment, or quality education.346 To consistently live in a state of impoverished
lack is a trauma that—as somatic trainers have taught us—exists in the subconscious and can
materialize as an internalized self-doubt when not addressed.347
 bell hooks observes, “Despite
powerful anti-racist struggle in this society, expressed in the sixties’ civil rights and black power
movements, internalized racism manifested by ongoing self-hate and low self-esteem has
345 Sam Juju Bae, In discussion with author, May 10, 2021.
346 See Anders Stephanson, Manifest Destiny: American Expansionism and the Empire of Right, (New York: Hill
and Wang, 1998)., Howard Zinn, A People’s History of the United States, (New York: HarperPerennial, 2015).
347 See Staci Haines, The Politics of Trauma: Somatics, Healing, and Social Justice (Berkeley, California: North
Atlantic Books, 2019).
184
intensified.”348 Due to internalized racism, it effectively becomes difficult for many Black people
to imagine themselves deserving a high quality of life, especially when precarity and resource
deprivation characterize their personal or communal day-to-day reality. As Sam highlights, it is
often difficult for Black people to believe they deserve access to their everyday needs or desires.
hooks concurs: “We are not raised to believe that living well is our birthright. Yet, it is. We have
to claim this birthright,” she insists. “Doing so automatically creates a change in perspective that
can act as an intervention on the stress in our lives.”349 Here is where Black witches maintain that
healing work takes place. Healing internalized anti-Blackness means repairing the self-worth
eroded by centuries of white supremacist capitalist patriarchy. It means cultivating an ability to
dream and believe “you deserve baby,” to not only shift your material and social reality but to
imagine a better world.
Iyalosa Osunyemi echoes Sam’s investment in deserving by discussing her theological
belief in inheritance. Her framework is grounded in an Orisa/Yoruba religious orientation,
emphasizing the Ori (one’s personal guiding orisa) and a faith that Olodumare (God) has
predetermined an abundant life.
Before you were born, you laid out a life for yourself. You don’t have to worry if
you deserve it. You already gave it to yourself before you got here. So, getting it is
a matter of remembering that it’s yours. Not thinking, “people who look like me
don’t get to have this.” The Odu says no one can bless you without the consent of
your Ori. We be blocking ourselves. But when you stop, you realize there’s a life
that you knew you were supposed to have.
My mother told me that when I had my first child, “it is only your prayers that
will feed and house this child. Don’t let anyone make you think that it’s your
husband, your job, or the money that you receive.” She said, “whenever you’re
down to your last and don’t know what you’re supposed to do, then pray, and it
will come to you. And truly, like magic, it will be there.”
348 hooks, Sisters of the Yam, 20.
349 Ibid., 73
185
What we owe to the universe is the fulfillment of this destiny. But to do that, our
needs must be met. I got to live by the beach. I can’t fulfil it nowhere else. But
we’re scared to say that. And once you say that, the universe is like, “You right.
That was our agreement. Here you go, the house by the ocean.” But too often, it’s
us waiting for somebody else’s approval when they don’t have anything to do
with it.350
Iyalosa Osunyemi’s appeal to Ori and acknowledgement that you “[lay] out a life for
yourself before you got here,” is central to the belief system of orisa devotees. According to the
Yoruba, before one arrives on earth, the Ori meets with Olodumare, the supreme energy
responsible for life’s creation, and together they agree on the person’s life purpose, including
career choice and family lineage.351 Iyalosa Osunyemi interprets an Ifá theological belief to
affirm that Black people deserve access to a well-resourced life which has the potential to heal
the internalized idea that, as Iyalosa puts it, “people who look like me don’t get to have this.”
While structural inequality might exist, one’s Ori and Olodumare have already agreed on a
destiny of abundance. To access a predetermined life, one must live per one’s purpose through a
process of – what many Black witches refer to as – ‘tapping in,’ or listening to intuitive messages
conveyed by spiritual guides such as one’s Ori. When coupled with destiny alignment,
petitioning the deities or the ancestors for one’s desires, spiritual co-creation can become less an
act of greed, individualism, or consumerism (like that which is prominent in American prosperity
gospel) and more of a method to come closer to one’s divine purpose and self-actualization.
Beliefs about alignment and healing are also apparent in Black witch discourse
concerning love magic. During exchanges with Yvette Wyatt, owner of the spiritual supply shop,
Motown Witch, in Detroit, Michigan, I asked her about spiritual co-creation and her most
frequently sold items. She shared,
350 Iyalosa Osunyemi Akalatunde, in discussion with author, July 30, 2021.
351 J. Omosade Awolalu, “Yoruba Sacrificial Practice,” Journal of Religion in Africa 5, no. 2 (1973): 81–93,
https://doi.org/10.2307/1594756. 29-40.
186
My biggest sellers right now are self-love baths. I made it because all these
women come in here for love work. And I don’t believe in trying to attract any
particular person. Instead, I tell everyone to work on getting yourself together,
and you will attract someone for you. Don’t go chasing after whoever.
Because sometimes people are fickle. You will do the work for them, and then
they don’t like the guy anymore and want him to go. And I’m like, “no, you just
did that spell to attract him.” Or now you’ve got the guy, and he doesn’t want to
be there. He doesn’t understand why he’s there and can’t leave you. I just think
that’s nuts.
Instead of trying to bind someone to you, you should first try loving yourself the
right way. Don’t put up with disrespectful people, having people treating you any
old kind of way. Those people will fall off when you begin that self-love work
because you exude this about yourself, and you will instead attract that right
person.
Even with my husband now. I was determined to spend my fifties alone. I didn’t
want another husband. I didn’t want to be bothered. I went and got me a big old
Bohemian apartment for like 500 bucks a month for me and my grandkids. This is
all I wanted to do. But this dude, who is 16 years younger than me, kept chasing
me and finally won me over. I suppose I exuded whatever I was exuding because
I was in a happy place and attracted a wonderful partner that way.352
Yvette was not the only respondent to indicate that loving oneself is the first step in attracting a
partner. Many of the witches I spoke with echoed such a belief, especially those like Yvette, that
work as spiritual service providers. They discussed numerous clients asking them for love spells
or binding rituals to ensure a specific person would express romantic interest. Most respondents
adamantly advised against coercive love work because, as Yvette notes, it often has negative
repercussions. Some repercussions include an inability for the love interest to exit the
relationship, the supplicant experiencing harassment from their desired spouse after being
“fickle” and deciding they no longer want the relationship, or lastly, the supplicant becoming
bound to a toxic relationship and effectively blocking more suitable potential partners. Instead of
352 Yvette Wyatt, In discussion with author, April 16, 2021.
187
love binding spells directed toward a particular person, most Black witches encouraged clients to
begin with spiritual self-love work, such as Yvette’s baths. Their rituals also emphasize the cocreative aspect of spiritual intervention that requires healing work on the material plane
alongside the spiritual. Clients are thus advised to seek out conventional forms of healing such as
therapy or medication and encouraged to improve non-romantic areas of their lives, such as
finding better employment, housing, or educational opportunities. Clients are then advised to
petition for a romantic partner with particular characteristics versus focusing on a specific person
who might not reciprocate interest or be generally a bad fit. According to most Black witches
participating in this study, self-love work and spiritual petitions develop the foundation
necessary to attract a healthy romantic partner.
However, self-love rhetoric can become problematic when discussing Black women and
marriage. Mainstream self-help books such as Steve Harvey’s Act Like a Lady, Think Like a
Man, and Iyanla Vanzant’s In the Meantime: Finding Yourself and the Love You Want or popular
media quotations such as RuPaul’s famous line, “If you can’t love yourself, how in the hell you
gonna love somebody else?”353 popularized the belief that self-love is necessary before the hunt
for marriage or partnership. Like some aspects of Yvette’s response to my questions about
spiritual co-creation, many contemporary self-help books put the onus solely on Black women to
change or ‘fix’ themselves to become better candidates for marriage. Sexism is the obvious
problem with a self-help framing, but even more nuanced is how anti-Blackness and economic
disparity impact Black women’s likelihood of becoming married. Dianne Stewart argues that the
prevailing impediment to Black cis heterosexual women’s union with Black men is not their lack
of healing or self-awareness but structural economic racism that prohibits Black communities
353 “The Most Inspiring RuPaul Quotes In Honor of the Icon’s Birthday - E! Online,” accessed March 10, 2022,
https://www.eonline.com/news/1092988/the-most-inspiring-rupaul-quotes-in-honor-of-the-icon-s-birthday.
188
from participating in the institution of marriage. Stewart highlights significant factors such as the
history of separating Black families during slavery, the prison industrial complex with its high
incarceration rates pertaining to Black men, and the lack of access to well-paying jobs, which
can make Black men feel inadequate and ill prepared for marriage and a family. Stewart
concludes her volume with an analysis of the popular television show Being Mary Jane, which
focuses on the Black woman’s quest for love and marriage.
In the final scene of Being Mary Jane, the main character, a dark-skinned Black woman,
is at her wedding, and the voiceover expresses that all you have to do is “allow the love you want
in!”354 Stewart notes that the show’s finale promotes a false and misleading message that fails to
account for structural inequality and that only very lucky Black women seeking to marry Black
men find it by simply letting love come to them. A narrative of “letting love come in” surfaces in
Yvette’s response to love magic when she shares her own story of not seeking a partner in her
50s and her eventual husband pursuing her. Yvette’s lived experiences are entirely valid, but
Stewart helps us to nuance the narrative of letting go and not getting in your own way that often
appears in broader Black witch spiritual communities’ approaches to love magic. A more
complex approach to love magic can include political activism, such as efforts to secure mutual
aid for Black communities, prison abolition, and intracommunity hiring practices. Action in the
material realm can then be employed alongside spells that aid in justice, such as mojo bags for
employment, roots to influence a court judge in one’s favor, or protection rituals during protests.
Practices to find love, such as lighting a pink candle or petitioning one’s ancestors, can also be
used to help find a romantic partner. Through the combined use of spells for justice and love as
well as action in the material realm, African-heritage religious practitioners can support the
354 Dianne M. Stewart, Black Women, Black Love: America’s War on African American Marriage (New York: Seal
Press, 2020). 235.
189
material conditions conducive to all Black women to find love. As Stewart advises, structural
critique and, I will add, petitioning for divine intervention does not negate the essential work of
self-help. On the contrary, healing mental health, establishing firm boundaries, and, as Yvette
puts it, “getting yourself together” are essential to combatting the structural inequality that makes
finding partnership for most Black people (regardless of gender or sexuality) difficult. Spiritual
co-creation, healing, and justice are all intertwined and interdependent, and LaReina (owner of
Queenly Conjure Tea Room in New Orleans) shared with me how they merge.
LaReina led me through Psalm 51, which is employed in Hoodoo for uncrossing rituals.
Many Hoodoo practitioners interpret each line of the Psalm as instructions for healing oneself,
their community, and spiritually co-creating a collective world. What follows is LaReina’s
interpretation.
When we’re doing uncrossing work, we usually pray with candles and Psalm 51.
We follow its structure. This first line, “Have mercy on me, O God, according to
your unfailing love,” is just honoring and thanking God. You always give thanks
first when writing a Hoodoo petition. It then says, “I acknowledge my
transgressions, and my sin is ever before me.” Here you’re just taking
accountability for what you’ve done in the past.
But this is my favorite part of this whole Psalm. “Behold, thou desirest truth in the
inward parts: and in the hidden part thou shalt make me to know wisdom. Thou
shall make me to know wisdom.” There he asked to pull out that hidden truth. So,
then you can view it, and you can see that what you’re holding on to is not true.
That’s the thing that’s blocking you from manifesting your desires. Once you can
identify it, you’re able to do the actual work.
For example, in our physical bodies, if we’re having trouble with healing, say
we’ve got a cut, and it’s infected, it’s likely because there’s something in there
that needs to be pulled out so that the body can heal itself. It’s the same thing on
the spiritual plane. Cause anything that’s physical is also of the spiritual. Say
we’re having trouble connecting with others or finding that we are having trouble
with money or our love life. There’s a truth that we have determined is true. It’s
not the truth of our lives, but we’ve deemed it true.
You begin finding out that this idea is not the truth because it’s harming other
areas of your life. For example, when clients come to me requesting help in their 
190
romantic relationships, I tell them I want you to do a spiritual cleanse and get a
notebook. I want you to start looking at the relationships you saw as a child. I
want you to start looking at how your parents were with each other. What does
that love looks like? And then, you can see your founding beliefs about what love
is supposed to be. My parents, for example, split up when I was very young, and I
had never seen my biological dad and mom be kind to each other, not once. There
was always an argument. And then, in the relationships that they had outside of
each other, it was always a new person coming around. So, I learned not to trust
your own people. I also learned that people will always leave, so you shouldn’t
stay connected with them. That influenced the relationships that I built as an
adult.
So, if you’re having trouble with your love life, go into the past and see what was
true and what was not true. Now you can move forward toward the next part of
that Psalm. Then the line “purge me with hyssop.” After I find that truth, I can
now work with hyssop medicine which is one of the oldest herbs we work with
for cleansing and removal in Hoodoo.
Then after that medicine and cleansing, you’re asking to be poured into and for
forgiveness. Now you can move forward into your next step. It’s like creating a
new heart of God, and you can actually do some work. You can change a habit,
such as if you have a history of addictions like alcohol. Or you start going where
the money is or start taking positive steps in your relationship by communicating
your needs more. Now you can start doing that cause you know what you’re
missing. For instance, you can tell your ancestors I would like to have these
elements in my next relationship. And once you’ve poured back into your cup,
manifesting the things you desire, now you can start sharing that cup with others.
Because of my ancestors, because of the work, the Orisas, and the Loa, now I can
share that love with other folks too.
Then it goes, “For thou desirest not sacrifice; else would I give it: thou delightest
not in burnt offering” All of these back in the day people just give away riches. If
you give a bunch of riches and you’re already rich, it’s not really a sacrifice. First,
you got to find what would benefit your community the best. Becoming humble.
Then, you can start the work of making things beautiful because then it’s not
about you in particular, but it’s about you as a whole and how you can be healing
for everybody’s world.
After people pour into your cup when you’re in need, you can start giving that
same energy or resources back to others. In a forest, each tree helps the other to
grow. It’s healing a whole—an ecosystem. We are an ecosystem too.355
Here, LaReina articulates an individual and communal wellbeing trajectory.
355 LaReina, In discussion with author, June 28, 2021.
191
According to LaReina’s interpretation of the Psalm, a first step is to remove what some
psychologists might refer to as a core belief, or an untrue narrative, such as Sam’s example of
her date not believing he deserved access to an abundant life.356 She then expands on Alexis’s
discussion of ancestral trauma and notions of subconscious influence by adding that sometimes
one’s early environment impacts experiences in adulthood— such as LaReina’s ideas about what
love can and should look like based on her parent’s unhealthy behaviors. Once false
subconscious narratives are swapped for something more life-affirming, like Iyalosa Osunyemi’s
belief in divine inheritance, then the co-creative work on the material plane can gain momentum.
Small habits like drinking less if suffering from alcoholism or becoming more financially stable
can begin, in conjunction with ongoing internal self-work. For LaReina, internal work also
means naming one’s needs in, say, a relationship or within a career. Once those needs are
identified, they can be communicated to the realm of the dead or one’s guiding deities for
support. As Yvette maintains, supplicants should identify their needs and the qualities they are
seeking in a partner versus petitioning for a specific person. Lastly, LaReina underscores that
justice, community accountability, and mutual aid are also essential. Once one’s cup is filled
through the support and love of the living community and spirits of the dead, it is time to give
others the same resources because, as she says, “we are an ecosystem.”
Black witches’ commitment to a wellness trajectory is still a very radical notion within an
American rationalist and patriarchal society that is only beginning to properly recognize mental
health conditions and their collateral consequences. America is still a country where capitalism
consumes, exhaustion, depression, and anxiety get suppressed under addiction, and productivity
356 Cognitive behavioral therapists will often identify core beliefs as deeply rooted negative ideas about oneself that
alter their perception of their environmental circumstances. See Judith S. Beck, Cognitive Behavior Therapy: Basics
and Beyond, 2nd ed (New York: Guilford Press, 2011).
192
is the marker for success and wellbeing.357 Black witches like LaReina, Yvette, and Osunyemi
are developing a community-wide value system that prioritizes health and healing through their
extensive planforms, which support Black women and femmes’ return inward. They encourage
seeking Black witches to ask, “What do I need right now?” “How does this job/lover/friend
support my highest potential?” or simply, “Am I happy?” For Black women and femmes, these
questions are transformative because when the answer is no, “I am not happy,” work needs to be
done and does occur in the physical and spiritual realms. Black witches use divination tools like
the Psalms, tarot, and bones to communicate with their Ori and ancestors to receive the guidance
necessary to act. Healing as action is a power independent of and often oppositional to the
American nation-state. When Black witches nurture a sense of worthiness, heal generations of
ancestral trauma, or break cycles of addiction, they ignite desires for something greater. When
the Black witch wants something more for herself and her community she must imagine a better
world and employ the necessary spiritual and physical tools to for co-creation.
Community Reach
Although community aid is typical of most Black religious organizations, Black witches
approach it through a unique Black feminist Africana religious orientation.358 Because most of
my interviewees identify as Black feminists—having been exposed to Black feminist thought
through formal schooling, social media, or quotidian rhetoric—they aim to combat white
supremacist entitlement and choose to adopt approaches to spiritual co-creation that account for
interlocking systems of oppression. Their Black feminist framework demands a revolutionary
357 Tricia Hersey, Rest Is Resistance: A Manifesto, First edition (New York: Little, Brown Spark, 2022).
358 See Evelyn Brooks Higginbotham, Righteous Discontent the Women’s Movement in the Black Baptist Church,
1880-1920 (Cambridge, Mass.; London: Harvard University Press, 1994). 
193
approach to social change predicated on dismantling oppressive systems of power like
capitalism. bell hooks argues in Feminist Theory that a “feminist movement to end sexist
oppression can be successful only if we are committed to revolution, to the establishment of a
new social order.”359 The Black women writers and activist group, the Combahee River
Collective (most active in the late 1980s) wrote in their collective statement saying “We realize
that the liberation of all oppressed peoples necessitates the destruction of the political-economic
systems of capitalism and imperialism as well as patriarchy. …Material resources must be
equally distributed among those who create these resources.”360 As the Combahee River
Collective illuminated how the Black woman experienced multiple forms of oppression in the
1970s and 80s, about a decade later, Kimberlé Crenshaw and Patricia Hill Collins popularized
and solidified an analysis of interlocking oppression through the framework of intersectionality,
which allowed for an even broader critical scope.361
Collins defines intersectionality as “a way of understanding and analyzing the complexity
in the world in people and in human experiences. …When it comes to social inequality, people’s
lives and the organization of power are better understood as being shaped not by a single axis of
social division, be it race or gender or class, but by many axes that work together and influence
each other.”362 Intersectionality is a framework that encourages an understanding of social
inequality based on interactions among various categories where “power relations of racism and
359 bell hooks, Feminist Theory: From Margin to Center, 2nd ed, South End Press Classics, v. 5 (Cambridge, MA:
South End Press, 2000). 161.
360 Keeanga-Yamahtta Taylor, ed., How We Get Free: Black Feminism and the Combahee River Collective
(Chicago, Ill: Haymarket Books, 2017); 15-27.
361 See Kimberlé Crenshaw, “Demarginalizing the Intersection of Race and Sex: A Black Feminist Critique of
Antidiscrimination Doctrine, Feminist Theory and Antiracist Politics,” University of Chicago Legal Forum 1989
(1989); Patricia Hill Collins and Sirma Bilge, Intersectionality, Key Concepts Series (Cambridge, UK ; Malden,
MA: Polity Press, 2016).
362 Patricia Hill Collins and Sirma Bilge, Intersectionality, Key Concepts Series (Cambridge, UK ; Malden, MA:
Polity Press, 2016). 2.
194
sexism gain meaning in relation to one another. This relational analysis rejects either/or thinking
and instead embraces a both/and frame that is better understood as a relationship rather than a
static entity.”363 When coupled with African religious orientations, Black feminist both/and
relational framing helps complicate Black witches’ understanding of systems of domination such
as capitalism.
Sam (Juju Bae), shared how her Africana spiritual practice informed her Black feminist
analysis concerning money.
The more I immerse myself in spiritual work with my ile, godparents, and
Hoodoo; my politics have changed. I feel like when we’re in movement, and we
don’t have that spiritual component, it gets muddy and murky, and we’re
constantly comparing things to whiteness even though we don’t want to, but we
don’t have another example of what it [social change] could look like. But I find
other examples in Hoodoo or with the orisa. Like, I have stories. I have reference
points.
For example, in conversations around money, although I’m still anti-capitalist,
there was a disconnect on how I saw money as just being completely evil and that
it just needed to be eradicated. And now I don’t particularly feel that same way
because I see that there are literally people who walk with spirits of money. It’s
the way that we use money, and money is really just energy like anything else that
we can decide to use for whatever. We give money the importance when we
speak over it what it should do.
Some people also have it in their destiny to have money. So how do I say
money’s supposed to be eradicated, but I can look at someone in a divinatory
reading and be like, “Baby, you’re supposed to be rich.” Like I can’t take away
that destiny. Instead, can we rethink what we mean when we say anti-capitalism?
How can we use money in a way that’s not rooted in capitalism or in people
having to die or not getting paid for their labor, but also recognizing that money
isn’t quite the issue?364
Sam reinterprets her Black feminist anti-capitalist consciousness through spiritual
experiences, therefore not replicating an exclusively religious or political approach to social
363 Ibid., 28.
364 Sam Juju Bae, In discussion with author, May 10, 2021.
195
change but a new spiritual epistemology where the religious and the political are inextricably
linked. Her Black witch thought holds two crucial, typically opposing desires to be true— a wish
to have abundant resources and one to live in a world without exploiting Black and brown people
to acquire those resources. Sam’s framing counters prosperity gospel thinking that remains
divorced from structural critique. Alternatively, her comments are firmly rooted in Black
feminism’s commitments to an equal distribution of resources and serve as a reminder that
African-heritage religions have practical application in Black people’s acquisition of
systemically denied financial and economic wealth. Sam’s method of communicating with the
dead and Africana deities, which she interprets through her Black feminist consciousness,
produces an alternative to purely secular ways of knowing. Her analysis is informed by a
spiritual epistemology that can benefit scholars and activists combating anti-Blackness, hyperconsumerism, and oppressive capitalism. Combining an Africana religious orientation with a
Black feminist framework also produces a new method of community-wide care that many Black
witches are implementing.
Maintaining an intersectional analysis of power means adopting approaches to spiritual
co-creation where resources are distributed equally among those historically denied access based
on structural inequality. Black witches have actualized a Black feminist method through systems
of collaborative care like mutual-aid programs—an approach to resource distribution that aims to
dismantle systems of oppression while meeting people’s immediate needs. Daizy October
Latifah (founder of the Witches Brew Facebook group and the term Blitch) is implementing
methods of care through The Blitch Fund, a mutual aid program that gives money to mostly lowincome Black women. “I grew up pretty poor in South Central, Los Angeles,” she explains.
One thing about California is that you cross a freeway, and you can see where all
the money is going, such as Hollywood. You cross that freeway going the other 
196
way, and there are people who literally can’t eat. You have to go to the liquor
store to eat for the day. I grew up in that environment. Once I got older, I saw that
need was always around. A need was always there, and getting needs met was
rare. So, I always thought to myself that once I can help people meet their needs, I
want to. I know I’ve had many situations in my life where I’m like, “I wish an
angel would pop out of the sky and be able to handle this bill for me or to get me
this thing that I really gotta get or pay for my plane ticket up to college or else I’m
not gonna be able to go to school.” Things like that. That kind of appearance
where you don’t have to beg or work for it. It’s just something you deserve that
comes to you. So as soon as I had the opportunity to set something up like that, I
did.
The Blitch Fund is a permanent community mutual aid fund where contributions
are collected from anybody who wants to contribute and are given to people in
need. And the only qualifiers are that the person must be Black and a practitioner
of African spiritual traditions. It’s been a beautiful experience being able to
provide that. We’ve probably given about $60,000 to people here in the U.S., the
Caribbean, and Africa. It still lightens, warms, and energizes my heart to know
that so many people are willing to give. You don’t have to apply. You don’t need
merit. All you must do is send a message. And only the ancestors decide who gets
it. Names are chosen through divination because, to me, that feels fair. The
ancestors have the bird’s eye view about what’s necessary, who needs it, and their
intentions. So, I leave it up to them to decide. Once it’s decided, the person
receives their portion of the pot for that month, no questions asked.365
The Blitch Fund is an admirable example of how some Black witches distribute financial
resources. There are no lengthy dehumanizing applications characteristic of government
institutions, nor examples of exceptionalism or merit typical within higher education. Moral
guidelines or required devotion to a leader are non-existent, unlike the devotional regulations
organizing Black philanthropic religious communities like Father Divine’s Peace Mission
Movement, whose members were required to take an oath of celibacy.366 Daizy structures the
Blitch fund based on her lived experiences and her broader Black feminist praxis. She omits
application requirements because she recognizes that structural inequality impedes access to
basic needs for Black people in the United States and the larger African Diaspora. In the
365 Daizy Latifah, in discussion with author, October 1, 2021.
366 Kate Bowler, Blessed: A History of the American Prosperity Gospel (New York: Oxford University Press,
2013)., 26-28.
197
description of the Blitch Fund on Daizy’s website, she notes that most of the recipients for the
fund are Black women (particularly those that are heads of their households), and emphasizes
how an equal distribution of resources is crucial in Hoodoo.
If your Hoodoo doesn’t serve the Black community financially, we don’t want
it…. In the tradition of authentic Conjure (Hoodoo, Rootwork), the success of the
community and the cultivation of its shared children is of paramount importance.
We know that we cannot actualize the empowered future our Ancestors fought for
if we as descendants are perpetually in states of imposed displacement, poverty,
and lack.367
For Daizy and many Black witches like her, Black people acquiring abundance is a social
justice issue. Although they stress an abundance beyond fundamental needs like food or shelter,
most Black witches are also cautious about subscribing to hyper-consumerism that only
replicates the status quo. It is easy, especially in the era of social media, for some spiritual
advisors/Black witches to advertise their products (like money attraction oils) through examples
of lavish lifestyles committed to consumerism. If one’s engagement with the spiritual realm is
not in service of other Black people, it often works in line with, or replaces, the capitalist greed
that has infiltrated numerous Black churches.
The Blitch Fund and similar initiatives are not typical philanthropy where established
class divisions are reinforced— such as the wealthy giving minimal support to people with low
income after extensive application processes and tax write-offs. Alternatively, it is a mutual aid
system that aims to dismantle systems of inequality while providing resources according to need.
Scholar and activist Dean Spade identifies a few differences between charity work and mutual
aid. According to Spade, characteristics of charity and governmental social service organizations
are that “1) They offer “help” to “underprivileged” absent of a context of injustice or strategy for
367 Daizy Latifah, “The #BLITCHFUND,” The AfroMystic, accessed January 27, 2022,
http://www.theafromystic.com/the-blitchfund.
198
transforming the conditions and are often paternalistic with rescue fantasies and elements of
saviorism, …2) they follow government regulations about how the work needs to happen
(usually requiring more money, causing reliance on grants, paid staff with professional degrees),
[and] 3) they impose eligibility criteria for services that divide people into “deserving” and
“undeserving.”“368 Alternatively, mutual aid groups are political in nature with “1) Efforts to
support people facing the most dire conditions, 2) Use people power to resist any efforts by the
government to regulate or shut down activities, and 3) they value self-determination for people
impacted or targeted by harmful social conditions.”369 Effectively charity organizations are
bureaucratic, depoliticized, and often reinforce institutions of hierarchy and oppression while
mutual aid groups are diffuse, established according to need, and committed to dismantling the
systems that cause inequality.370
Another Black witch creating mutual aid programs is LaReina (the burlesque dancer and
owner of Queenly Conjure Tea Room in New Orleans). During Hurricane Ida, which hit New
Orleans in August 2021, causing massive flooding and leaving almost a million people without
power, LaReina offered about 30 free rice bowls complete with grilled chicken, alligator, or
blackened salmon to anyone in need. Although she too was without power, she was able to grill
meat outside and biked food over to those who sent her a message on social media. Below is the
picture she posted the day of the offering and her thoughts on the process.
368 Dean Spade, “Mutual Aid Chart,” accessed March 10, 2022, http://www.deanspade.net/2019/12/04/mutual-aidchart/.
369 Ibid.
370 Dean Spade also notes that categories distinguishing charity organizations from mutual aid programs are fluid,
and many organizations blur the lines while still centering a revolutionary approach to organizing. 
199
Figure 3: LaReina, Owner of Queenly Conjure
Truly Living in Ancestral Power. Just a PSA of what #cottagecore [the tearoom
she is currently opening] could truly accomplish in a world in desperate need of
change.
This picture is of me today- not done up, not staged, it’s not the “pretty” side of it,
but it’s functional. Spent all morning in the heat of the kitchen cooking for the
community. Biked and packed up care packages for delivery. Packed away food
for the rest of the week without power and prepped my space to start making
dough and pastries for delivery during the weekend. Cleaned the house and put
away the extra blankets for sharing. It felt like all day I was in a house busy with
my Ancestors, guiding me, teaching me, gifting their strength and wisdom. So,
when I look at this picture I see my great grandmother’s, aunties, and cousins
staring back at me with a “job well done.” I’m ready to start rebuilding
community. Reeducating our children how to grow and feed ourselves, how to
work with earth to heal both our environments and our bodies. So keep an eye out
for the Tea House. Let’s get to work.371
371 LaReina, “Queenly Conjure,” Queenly Conjure, accessed September 30, 2021,
https://www.queenlyconjure.store//.
200
Like Dean Spade’s definition of mutual aid and Black feminist analyses of intersectionality and
approaches to resource distribution, LaReina emphasizes a political approach.
She speaks to reeducation, healing, and the capacity to build alternative worlds. Her
offering is not institutionalized, does not require bureaucratic application processes, and is a
responsive tactic to troubling circumstances. And, still, the mutual aid that Spade defines and
LaReina enacts is not new to African Americans living under a white supremacist state where
Black people cannot consistently rely upon government aid for support or crisis response.
LaReina channels the spirit of her feminine ancestors when, in an apron characteristic of female
domesticity, she stands strong with her hands on her hips—a pose of spiritual and physical power
thought to derive from Kongo martial arts.372 LaReina, Daizy, and Black witches like them
mirror lineages of the quiet resistance undertaken by women and femmes who know that a
revolution cannot occur if the people are starved, parched, or too depressed to get out of bed.
Wellbeing is intrinsic to their Black, feminist, and witch vision of world change.
Conclusion
Black witches’ Black feminist Africana religious orientation facilitates the space for a
new interpretation of manifestation work. It directs practitioners out of the prosperity gospel that,
without structural analysis, has consciously or unconsciously blamed believers for their lack of
material access. Spiritual co-creation alternatively leads practitioners into an empowered state,
shaped by African-originated beliefs in alignment, reciprocity, and the faith that one’s ancestors
and deities will provide divine intervention. After years of their own healing work, Black witches
372 Robert Farris Thompson, Flash of the Spirit: African and Afro-American Art and Philosophy, 1st Vintage Books
ed (New York: Vintage Books, 1984).
201
stress the importance of healthy boundaries, therapy, and self-worth. Their holistic healing work
cultivates a belief in deserving an abundant life and encourages the tangible action necessary to
spiritually co-create one’s desired world. However, as LaReina and Daizy have shown, an
individual’s material success means very little without community uplift. For many Black
witches, spiritual co-creation is political, and centers commitments to redistributing resources
through mutual aid programs and deconstructing the capitalist individualism that can seep into
spiritual beliefs. Their religiopolitical spiritual co-creation is just one example of what merging
the political and spiritual can do. It can potentially shift entire conceptions of – not only one’s
self-worth, but – what is possible for the future of our world. The dreaming, the visualization,
and the belief in possibility—coupled and indistinguishable from a critique of white supremacist
capitalist patriarchy—allow for the design of a better world and generate the self-determination
necessary to take the incremental steps to get there. 
Conclusion:
Charting a New Discourse
Like the opening description of a staring Mawiyah in her Black vinyl catsuit, “Black
Witch Thought” paints a picture of an empowered woman—an empowered woman calling on
the terms witch and witchcraft in ways descended from her African American ancestors—
constructing an ontological identity of nonnormative and defiant power. She filters through
Black religious nationalism sifting out ideas central to her religiopolitical identity, discarding the
rest, and assembling a narrative around material manifestation capable of changing American
religious discourse. We can see the Black witch self as a multitude, composed and empowered
by the ancestors of Black feminisms—Audre Lorde, bell hooks, Toni Morison, Ella Baker, Ida
B. Wells, June Jordan; the ancestors of Black religious nationalism—Edward Wilmot Blyden,
James Cone, Elijah Muhammad and Efuntola Oseijeman Adelabu Adefunmi; and all of those
that kept African descended traditions alive in the confines of white Christian supremacy—Zora
Neal Hurston, Dr. Buzzard, Baba Medahochi, and Marie Laveau. With identity being complex
and ever-shifting, sometimes the Black witch in all of her power is merely an ideal that
practitioners strive for each day. Sometimes she is a manifested desire to live more authentically,
to deeply listen to one’s Ori, intuition, or ancestors, to not get consumed by capitalism’s
individualism or Black essentialism. She is a testament to remaining in a faith where power lies
within oneself and amongst a collective.
As an academic study, this dissertation addresses questions concerning the means and
methods by which marginalized communities subvert oppressive forms of the nation-state and
reshape power at individual and collective levels. Although power is typically defined under
patriarchal terms equating force and militarization with control, subaltern communities have 
203
sought power within more accessible quotidian feminized spaces. Scholars across the
humanities—like Jafari Allen, Saba Mahmood, and Cristina Sharpe—have searched quotidian
spaces for glimpses of power.373 Within Africana religious studies, questions of power outside
the nation-state are addressed in the context of the divine. Religious studies scholars have
explored semi-autonomous religious communities like the Black Baptist Church, Yoruba/Orisabased temples, Spiritualist Churches, and Islamic mosques. At the interpersonal level, scholars
have analyzed African American folk healing modalities outside Western medicine,
Hoodoo/conjure practices that subvert institutional white supremacist authority, as well as
feminized practices - like cooking - that keep religion alive.374 By examining an emerging
African American spiritual movement and identity that is intentionally unorthodox, without
established institutions, and primarily practiced by women and femmes, “Black Witch Thought”
expands on what academics know about cultivating community-based notions of power for
African Americans within the 21st century through Black religion and spirituality.
Moreover, by identifying the discourse of Black witches, this dissertation contributes to
scholarship charting the evolution of contemporary Black radical and religious thought. As
discussed in Chapter Three, scholars like Gayraud Wilmore and C. Eric Lincoln documented
African Americans’ departure from the Black church to join, instead, what Judith Weisenfeld
373 Christina Elizabeth Sharpe, In the Wake: On Blackness and Being (Durham: Duke University Press, 2016); Saba
Mahmood, Politics of Piety: The Islamic Revival and the Feminist Subject (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University
Press, 2012); Jafari S. Allen, Venceremos? The Erotics of Black Self-Making in Cuba, Perverse Modernities
(Durham [NC]: Duke University Press, 2011).
374 See Stephanie Y. Mitchem, African American Folk Healing (New York: New York University Press, 2007);
Yvonne Chireau, Black Magic: Religion and the African American Conjuring Tradition (Berkeley, CA: University
of California Press, 2006); Elizabeth Pérez, Religion in the Kitchen: Cooking, Talking, and the Making of Black
Atlantic Traditions, North American Religions (New York: New York University Press, 2016); Albert J. Raboteau,
Slave Religion: The “Invisible Institution” in the Antebellum South, Updated ed (Oxford ; New York: Oxford
University Press, 2004); Margarita Simon Guillory, Spiritual and Social Transformation in African American
Spiritual Churches: More than Conjurers, Routledge Studies in Religion 63 (London ; New York: Routledge,
Taylor & Francis Group, 2018); Tracey E. Hucks, Yoruba Traditions & African American Religious Nationalism,
Religions of the Americas Series (Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press, 2014).
204
calls religio-racial groups like the Moorish Science Temple, or what Tracey Hucks identifies as
Black religious nationalist groups such as Yoruba-inspired communities who purported that they
were practicing a tradition more ‘authentically’ African.375 Still, historically, Black religious
nationalist groups often maintained many of the conventional ideologies of the Christian church,
employing European metrics for establishing legitimacy. They constructed status through
Biblical lineage (such as identifying as Hebrews), claimed ties to centralized societies in Egypt,
emphasized the heterosexual family unit, and reimagined an African American past by choosing
identities such as Moor, Kemetian, or Washitaw (an American Indigenous identity). Black
witches are departing from racial identities not likely connected to their ancestry and are instead
moving toward a West and West-Central African orientation. By doing so, they are reconnecting
to a transatlantic past evident in their practice of Hoodoo and reimaginings of Ifá in ways that
reflect and benefit an African American cultural experience. Their investment in personal power
and a Black feminist critique also reflects a 21st
-century moment during which the American
cultural landscape, particularly the younger generations, are more invested in deconstructing
systems of oppression around gender, sexuality, and whiteness.
An expanded treatment of these motifs will allow me to further document how Black
witches’ Black feminist Africana religious orientation dismantles the contemporary concerns
associated with previously insufficient imaginings of Black religious nationalist ideologies.
Some current Black religious nationalist beliefs include homophobia and transphobia, dangerous
375 Gayraud S. Wilmore, Black Religion and Black Radicalism: An Interpretation of the Religious History of African
Americans, 3rd ed.,(Maryknoll, NY: Orbis Books, 1998); C. Eric Lincoln and Edward Franklin Frazier, The Negro
Church in America /The Black Church Since Frazier (New York: Schocken books, 1974); Judith Weisenfeld, New
World A-Coming: Black Religion and Racial Identity during the Great Migration (New York: New York University
Press, 2016); Tracey E. Hucks, Yoruba Traditions & African American Religious Nationalism, Religions of the
Americas Series (Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press, 2014).
205
rhetoric around healthcare practices such as COVID-19 vaccine skepticism, and sovereignty
movements where members believe they are outside US law. As a case study, I will attend the ile
of which some Black witches are a part. The ile, located in Baltimore, Maryland, is connected to
Oyotunji Village founder Oba Efuntola Adefunmi I, a Black religious nationalist whose
patriarchal convictions resulted in questionable polygamy practices as well as religious initiation
of women without the provision of equitable training. The Black witch ile members I initially
spoke with were not abandoning the political nature of founders like Adefumi but, rather,
integrating their Black feminist critique into community praxis. They were not only shifting
discourse, but creating a spiritual space where all Black members, including women, and queer,
and trans people, are respected and celebrated. There are more cases like this emerging daily.
In a moment in academia where Afropessimist scholars such as Achille Mbembe,
Christina Sharpe, and Frank Wilderson remind us that “the weather is the total climate; and the
total climate is antiblack,”376 a Black feminist Africana religious orientation offers a new
spiritual epistemology for combatting anti-blackness. As scholars continue to identify the subtle
and overt iterations of anti-Blackness, it is equally important to name tangible forms of
resistance. Into the late 20th century - out of a distaste for Abrahamic supremacy - many scholars
and activists abandoned religion as a social justice tool. But as Black witches now turn to
Africana spiritual communities and traditions that are generally less institutionalized, hierarchal,
and patriarchal, they are reimagining the use of religion for social change.
376 Christina Elizabeth Sharpe, In the Wake: On Blackness and Being (Durham: Duke University Press, 2016). 104.
Also see Achille Mbembe, “Necropolitics,” Public Culture 15, no. 1 (January 1, 2003): 11–40,
https://doi.org/10.1215/08992363-15-1-11; Frank B. Wilderson, Afropessimism, First edition (New York: Liveright
Publishing Corporation, a division of W.W. Norton and Company, 2020).
206
They are co-creating a spiritual epistemology that takes shape as a collective analysis, in
internalized notions of self, and material outcomes. A spiritual epistemology appears in Sam’s
(Juju Bae) belief that money does not need to be eradicated based on her findings through
divination, and Toya’s commitment to Black separatism based on her theological belief that the
ancestors will only work for someone of African descent. In these examples, Toya and Sam offer
a spiritually African-informed analysis of anti-capitalism and anti-Blackness.
Referencing a specific material intervention, when Iyalosa Osunyemi’s message of divine
inheritance reached hundreds of Black women across the country, listeners began making
tangible improvements in their daily lives. Her message has led Black women to leave abusive
relationships, quit uninspiring low-paying jobs to pursue their creative interests, and build a solid
intergenerational, mutually supportive community known as the Sweet Water Collective.
Finally, Black witches’ spiritual epistemology encourages a self-actualized internal self,
such as when Soraya Jean-Louis speaks about her ability to feel people’s energy through
physical touch or in Rebeca Spirit’s discussion of her capacity to speak to the dead. Their
insistence on connecting to inherent powers versus discarding them as something of their
imagination demonstrates an understanding of self that is powerful—a sense of self that informs
and dictates one’s life to be lived in a more authentic and actualized manner.
In many ways, “Black Witch Thought” serves as a document of empowerment in and of
itself. It is not a debate, but a Black feminist dialogue between Black women and femmes. The
focus on stories, the lengthy excerpts of interlocutors’ responses, and the emphasis on hope,
power, and the future are intentional. When research excerpts have been presented at
conferences, in articles, and within dialogue, audiences and interlocutors have reflected that they
left feeling glimpses of the power Black witches embody. I hope this dissertation and its future 
207
iterations continue to convey the sense of power and love encapsulating the Black witch’s
strength, even when it is an ideal or a shimmer of transcendence. It is a prayer that we all find a
bit of spiritual power. Whether the ancestors of the Black diaspora populate your cultural past, or
there are other cultural representatives residing in your corner, the wish remains that the reader
might listen a bit more intuitively and intently to a spiritual way of knowing for - as a Black
feminist Africana religious orientation teaches us - sometimes spiritual epistemologies lead not
only toward an internal sense of power but also a greater collective sense as well. Thus, I close
this study in unison with America’s 21st
-century Black witches, affirming all power, in all forms,
to all the people willing and working to wield it.
Selected Bibliography
 Primary Source Documents
Catterall, Helen Tunnicliff, and James J. Hayden, eds. Judicial Cases Concerning American Slavery
and the Negro. Buffalo, N.Y: W.S. Hein, 1998.
Cross, Tom Peete. “Witchcraft in North Carolina.” Studies in Philology 16, no. 3 (1919): 217–87.
Dorson, Richard M. “Negro Witch Stories on Tape.” Midwest Folklore 2, no. 4 (1952): 229–41.
Georgia Writers’ Project, ed. Drums and Shadows: Survival Studies among the Georgia Coastal
Negroes. Athens: University of Georgia Press, 1986.
Gray, Thomas. “Nat Turner, 1800? -1831. The Confessions of Nat Turner, the Leader of the Late
Insurrection in Southampton, Va.” Accessed July 6, 2022.
https://docsouth.unc.edu/neh/turner/turner.html.
Handy, Mrs. M. P. “Witchcraft Among the Negroes [Volume 8, Issue 194, Dec 14, 1872; Pp. 666-
667].” Appletons’ Journal: A Magazine of General Literature.,
http://name.umdl.umich.edu/acw8433.1-08.194.
Hurston, Zora Neale. Mules and Men. Harper Perennial Modern Classics. New York, NY: Harper
Perennial, 2008.
— “Hoodoo in America.” The Journal of American Folklore 44, no. 174 (1931): 317–417.
https://doi.org/10.2307/535394.
Hyatt, Harry Middleton. Hoodoo - Conjuration - Witchcraft - Rootwork, Beliefs Accepted By Many
Negroes and White Persons These Being Orally Recorded Among Blacks and Whites. Vol. 1-5. 5
vols. Alma Egan Hyatt Foundation (New York, N.Y.). Washington, DC: Hannibal, Mo., 1970.
Library of Congress, Washington, D.C. 20540 USA. “About This Collection | Born in Slavery: Slave
Narratives from the Federal Writers’ Project, 1936-1938 | Digital Collections | Library of
Congress.” Digital Collection. Accessed April 27, 2023. https://www.loc.gov/collections/slavenarratives-from-the-federal-writers-project-1936-to-1938/about-this-collection/.
Puckett, Newbell Niles. Folk Beliefs of the Southern Negro. Kessinger Pub., 2003.
Secondary Sources
Abimbola, ’Wande, and Ivor L. Miller. Ifá Will Mend Our Broken World: Thoughts on Yoruba
Religion and Culture in Africa and the Diaspora. 2. print. Roxbury: Aim Books, 2003.
209
Adjepong, Anima. “Invading Ethnography: A Queer of Color Reflexive Practice.” Ethnography 20,
no. 1 (March 1, 2019): 27–46. https://doi.org/10.1177/1466138117741502.
Allen, Jafari S. Venceremos? The Erotics of Black Self-Making in Cuba. Perverse Modernities.
Durham [NC]: Duke University Press, 2011.
Anatol, Giselle Liza. The Things That Fly in the Night: Female Vampires in Literature of the CircumCaribbean and African Diaspora. Critical Caribbean Studies. New Brunswick, New Jersey:
Rutgers University Press, 2015.
Anderson, Jeffrey E. Hoodoo, Voodoo, and Conjure: A Handbook. Greenwood Folklore Handbooks.
Westport, Conn: Greenwood Press, 2008.
Anderson, Victor. Beyond Ontological Blackness. London, UNKNOWN: Bloomsbury Publishing,
2016. http://www.myilibrary.com?id=952480.
Ardener, Edwin. “The New Anthropology and Its Critics.” Man 6, no. 3 (1971): 449–67.
https://doi.org/10.2307/2799031.
Awolalu, J. Omosade. “Yoruba Sacrificial Practice.” Journal of Religion in Africa 5, no. 2 (1973):
81–93. https://doi.org/10.2307/1594756.
Baer, Hans A. Biomedicine and Alternative Healing Systems in America: Issues of Class, Race,
Ethnicity, and Gender. Madison, Wisconsin: The University of Wisconsin Press, 2001.
Bird, Stephanie Rose. 365 Days of Hoodoo: Daily Rootwork, Mojo, & Conjuration. First Edition.
Woodbury, Minnesota: Llewellyn Publications, 2018.
———. Sticks, Stones, Roots & Bones: Hoodoo, Mojo & Conjuring with Herbs. 1st ed. St. Paul,
Minn: Llewellyn Publications, 2004.
———. The Healing Power of African American Spirituality: A Celebration of Ancestor Worship,
Herbs and Hoodoo, Ritual and Conjure. Charlottesville: Hampton Roads Publishing, 2022.
Bockie, Simon. Death and the Invisible Powers: The World of Kongo Belief. Bloomington: Indiana
University Press, 1993.
Bomani, Mawiyah. “Twenty-Four-Hour Woman.” University of New Orleans Theses and
Dissertations, December 19, 2008. https://scholarworks.uno.edu/td/896.
Bourdieu, Pierre, and Pierre Bourdieu. Outline of a Theory of Practice. Nachdr. Cambridge Studies in
Social and Cultural Anthropology 16. Cambridge: Cambridge Univ. Press, 2010.
Bowler, Kate. Blessed: A History of the American Prosperity Gospel. New York: Oxford University
Press, 2013.
Brooks, Kinitra, Kameelah L. Martin, and LaKisha Simmons. “Conjure Feminism: Toward a
Genealogy.” Hypatia 36, no. 3 (ed 2021): 452–61. https://doi.org/10.1017/hyp.2021.43.
210
Broussard, Patricia A. “Black Women’s Post-Slavery Silence Syndrome: A Twenty-First Century
Remnant of Slavery, Jim Crow, and Systemic Racism - Who Will Tell Her Stories.” Journal of
Gender, Race & Justice 16 (2013): 373.
Brown, Ras Michael. African-Atlantic Cultures and the South Carolina Lowcountry. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 2014.
Bucchieri, Rebecca L. “Bridging the Gap: The Connection between Violence against Animals and
Violence against Humans.” Journal of Animal & Natural Resource Law 11 (2015): 115.
Byrne, Rhonda, and Rhonda Byrne. The Secret. 1st Atria Books/Beyond Words hardcover ed. New
York: Hillsboro, Or: Atria Books ; Beyond Words Pub, 2006.
Campbell, Heidi. “Understanding the Relationship between Religion Online and Offline in a
Networked Society.” Journal of the American Academy of Religion 80 (March 1, 2012): 64–93.
https://doi.org/10.2307/41348770.
Castor, N. Fadeke. Spiritual Citizenship: Transnational Pathways from Black Power to IFÁ in
Trinidad. Durham: Duke University Press, 2017.
Chireau, Yvonne. Black Magic: Religion and the African American Conjuring Tradition. Berkeley,
CA: University of California Press, 2006.
———. “Video: Black Magic Matters: Hoodoo as Ancestral Religion.” Accessed April 4, 2023.
https://cswr.hds.harvard.edu/news/magic-matters/2021/11/10.
Chopra, Deepak. The Seven Spiritual Laws of Success: A Pocketbook Guide to Fulfilling Your
Dreams, 2015.
———. The Spontaneous Fulfillment of Desire: Harnessing the Infinite Power of Coincidence. 1st
ed. New York: Harmony Books, 2003.
Cognac & Conjure. “Roots, Hoodoo and Conjuration: The First African American Religion.”
Accessed January 5, 2022. https://www.cognacxconjure.com/myeshxa/2019/7/30/roots-hoodooand-conjuration-the-first-african-american-religion.
Conner, Randy P., and David Hatfield Sparks. Queering Creole Spiritual Traditions: Lesbian, Gay,
Bisexual, and Transgender Participation in African-Inspired Traditions in the Americas. New
York: Harrington Park Press, 2004.
Crenshaw, Kimberle. “Demarginalizing the Intersection of Race and Sex: A Black Feminist Critique
of Antidiscrimination Doctrine, Feminist Theory and Antiracist Politics.” University of Chicago
Legal Forum 1989 (1989): 139.
Davis, Angela Y. Women, Race & Class. 1st Vintage Books ed. New York: Vintage Books, 1983.
211
Deslippe, Philip. “The Hindu in Hoodoo: Fake Yogis, Pseudo-Swamis, and the Manufacture of
African American Folk Magic.” Amerasia Journal 40, no. 1 (January 1, 2014): 34–56.
https://doi.org/10.17953/amer.40.1.a21442914234450w.
Diakité, Dianne Stewart, and Tracey Hucks. “Africana Religious Studies: Toward a Transdisciplinary
Agenda in an Emerging Field.” Journal of Africana Religions 1, no. 1 (January 1, 2013): 28–77.
Dorsey, Lilith. Orishas, Goddesses, and Voodoo Queens: The Divine Feminine in the African
Religious Traditions. Newburyport, MA: Weiser Books, 2020.
Edwards, Gary, and John Mason. Black Gods--Òrìṣà Studies in the New World. Rev. 4th ed.
[Brooklyn, N.Y: Yorùbá Theological Archministry, 1998.
Ehrenreich, Barbara, and Deirdre English. Witches, Midwives, and Nurses: A History of Women
Healers. 2nd ed. New York City: Feminist Press at the City University of New York, 2010.
Evans-Pritchard, E. E., and Eva Gillies. Witchcraft, Oracles, and Magic among the Azande. Abridged
with an introd. by Eva Gillies. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1976.
Fett, Sharla M. Working Cures: Healing, Health, and Power on Southern Slave Plantations. Gender
and American Culture. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 2002.
Flowers, Zoe. In Praise of The Wytch. S.L.: Balboa Press, 2021.
Foucault, Michel. “The Subject and Power.” Critical Inquiry 8, no. 4 (1982): 777–95.
Frazier, Edward Franklin. The Negro Church in America. New York: Schocken books, 1974.
———. The Negro Church in America. New York: Schocken books, 1974.
Friedland, Roger. “Religious Nationalism and the Problem of Collective Representation.” Annual
Review of Sociology 27, no. 1 (2001): 125–52. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.soc.27.1.125.
Fu-Kiau, Kimbwandènde Kia Bunseki. African Cosmology of the Bântu-Kôngo: Tying the Spiritual
Knot: Principles of Life & Living. 2nd ed. Brooklyn, N.Y: Athelia Henrietta Press, pub. in the
name of Orunmila, 2001.
Games, Alison. Witchcraft in Early North America. American Controversies Series. Lanham, Md:
Rowman & Littlefield Publishers, 2010.
Gawain, Shakti. Creative Visualization: Use the Power of Your Imagination to Create What You Want
in Your Life. Rev. ed. Navato, Calif: Nataraj Pub./New World Library, 2002.
Geertz, Hildred. “An Anthropology of Religion and Magic, I.” The Journal of Interdisciplinary
History 6, no. 1 (1975): 71–89. https://doi.org/10.2307/202825.
212
GhaneaBassiri, Kambiz. A History of Islam in America: From the New World to the New World
Order. 1. publ. Cambridge: Cambridge Univ. Press, 2010.
Gomez, Michael Angelo. Exchanging Our Country Marks: The Transformation of African Identities
in the Colonial and Antebellum South. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1998.
Gossett, Che. “Blackness, Animality, and the Unsovereign.” Versobooks.com. Accessed October 22,
2021. https://www.versobooks.com/blogs/2228-che-gossett-blackness-animality-and-theunsovereign.
Grant, Jacquelyn. White Women’s Christ and Black Women’s Jesus: Feminist Christology and
Womanist Response. American Academy of Religion Academy Series, no. 64. Atlanta, Ga:
Scholars Press, 1989.
Grieve, Gregory. “Imagining a Virtual Religious Community: Neo-Pagans on The Internet.” Chicago
Anthropology Exchange 7 (1995).
Guillory, Margarita Simon. Spiritual and Social Transformation in African American Spiritual
Churches: More than Conjurers. Routledge Studies in Religion 63. London ; New York:
Routledge, Taylor & Francis Group, 2018.
Haines, Staci. The Politics of Trauma: Somatics, Healing, and Social Justice. Berkeley, California:
North Atlantic Books, 2019.
Haley, Sarah. “Carceral Constructions of Black Female Deviance.” In No Mercy Here. University of
North Carolina Press, 2016. https://doi.org/10.5149/northcarolina/9781469627595.003.0001.
Hall, David D., ed. Lived Religion in America: Toward a History of Practice. Princeton, N.J:
Princeton University Press, 1997.
Harding, Rachel E. A Refuge in Thunder: Candomblé and Alternative Spaces of Blackness. Blacks in
the Diaspora. Bloomington, Ind: Indiana University Press, 2003.
Harris, Lakeesha J. “Healing Through (Re)Membering and (Re)Claiming Ancestral Knowledge
About Black Witch Magic.” In Black Women’s Liberatory Pedagogies: Resistance,
Transformation, and Healing Within and Beyond the Academy, edited by Olivia N. Perlow,
Durene I. Wheeler, Sharon L. Bethea, and BarBara M. Scott, 245–63. Cham: Springer
International Publishing, 2018. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-65789-9_14.
Hazzard-Donald, Katrina. Mojo Workin’: The Old African American Hoodoo System. Urbana, IL:
University of Illinois Press, 2013.
Herskovits, Melville J. The Myth of the Negro Past. Boston: Beacon Press, 1990.
Hill Collins, Patricia. Black Feminist Thought: Knowledge, Consciousness, and the Politics of
Empowerment. 2nd ed. Routledge Classics. New York: Routledge, 2009.
213
Hill Collins, Patricia, and Sirma Bilge. Intersectionality. Key Concepts Series. Cambridge, UK ;
Malden, MA: Polity Press, 2016.
Hoodoo Hussy Conjure Enterprises. “Hoodoo Hussy Conjure Enterprises.” Accessed October 5,
2022. https://www.hoodoohussy.com.
Hoodoo Society. “Chesapeake Conjure Society.” Accessed January 5, 2022.
https://hoodoosociety.com/community.
hooks, bell. Ain’t I a Woman: Black Women and Feminism. Second edition. New York: Routledge,
Taylor & Francis Group, 2015.
———. All about Love: New Visions. First William Morrow paperback edition. New York: William
Morrow, 2018.
———. Feminism Is for Everybody: Passionate Politics. London: Pluto Press, 2000.
———. Feminist Theory: From Margin to Center. 2nd ed. South End Press Classics, v. 5.
Cambridge, MA: South End Press, 2000.
———. Sisters of the Yam: Black Women and Self-Recovery. 3rd edition. New York: Routledge/
Taylor & Francis Group, 2015.
———. The Will to Change: Men, Masculinity, and Love. 1. paperback edition. New York London
Toronto Sydney: Washington Square Press, 2005.
Hucks, Tracey E. Yoruba Traditions & African American Religious Nationalism. Religions of the
Americas Series. Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press, 2014.
Hull, Gloria T. Soul Talk: The New Spirituality of African American Women. Rochester, Vt: Inner
Traditions, 2001.
Hutton, Ronald. “The Meaning of the Word ‘Witch.’” Magic, Ritual, and Witchcraft 13, no. 1 (2018):
98–119. https://doi.org/10.1353/mrw.2018.0003.
———. The Witch: A History of Fear, from Ancient Times to the Present. New Haven: Yale
University Press, 2017.
Idowu, Bọlaji. Olodumare: God in Yoruba Belief. A & B Book Dist Inc, 1994.
Iyalosa Osunyemi Akalatunde. “Got2BOsun.” Got2BOshun. Accessed September 30, 2021.
https://www.got2boshun.org.
Johnson, Patrick. “‘Quare’ Studies, or (Almost) Everything I Know about Queer Studies I Learned
from My Grandmother.” Text and Performance Quarterly 21 (January 1, 2001): 1–25.
https://doi.org/10.1080/10462930128119.
Johnson, S. Myth of Ham in Nineteenth-Century American Christianity: Race, Heathens, and the
People of ... God. Place of publication not identified: Palgrave Macmillan, 2016.
214
JuJu Bae. “There’s More To This Witch Sh*t.” A Little Juju Podcast. Accessed January 11, 2022.
https://podcasts.apple.com/no/podcast/ep-15-theres-more-to-this-witch-sht/id1444197888?i=1000429754765.
JuJuBae. “A Little Juju Podcast.” itsjujubae.com. Accessed September 30, 2021.
https://www.itsjujubae.com/podcast.
Kay, Roy. The Ethiopian Prophecy in Black American Letters. Gainesville: University Press of
Florida, 2011. https://muse.jhu.edu/book/17962.
LaReina. “Queenly Conjure.” Queenly Conjure. Accessed September 30, 2021.
https://www.queenlyconjure.store//.
Latifah, Daizy. “BLITCH.” The AfroMystic. Accessed January 20, 2022.
http://www.theafromystic.com/blitch.
———. “The #BLITCHFUND.” The AfroMystic. Accessed January 27, 2022.
http://www.theafromystic.com/the-blitchfund.
Lee, Shayne. “PROSPERITY THEOLOGY: T.D. Jakes and the Gospel of the Almighty Dollar.”
CrossCurrents 57, no. 2 (2007): 227–36.
Lived Religion in America: Toward a History of Practice. Princeton University Press, 1997.
https://doi.org/10.2307/j.ctv143mdcw.
Lofton, Kathryn. “The Perpetual Primitive in African American Religious Historiography.” The New
Black Gods, 2009, 171.
Long, Charles H. “Primitive/Civilized: The Locus of a Problem.” History of Religions 20, no. 1/2
(August 1, 1980): 43–61. https://doi.org/10.1086/462861.
Lorde, Audre. Sister Outsider: Essays and Speeches. Berkeley, Calif: Crossing Press, c2007, n.d.
Luna, Bri. “The Hoodwitch.” The Hoodwitch. Accessed January 20, 2022.
https://www.thehoodwitch.com.
MacGaffey, Wyatt. Religion and Society in Central Africa: The BaKongo of Lower Zaire. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, 1986.
Mahmood, Saba. Politics of Piety: The Islamic Revival and the Feminist Subject. Princeton, N.J:
Princeton University Press, 2012.
Manigault-Bryant, LeRhonda S. Talking to the Dead: Religion, Music, and Lived Memory among
Gullah-Geechee Women. Durham; London: Duke University Press, 2014.
Martin, Kameelah L. Conjuring Moments in African American Literature: Women, Spirit Work, and
Other Such Hoodoo. 1st ed. New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2013.
215
Mbembe, Achille. “Necropolitics.” Public Culture 15, no. 1 (January 1, 2003): 11–40.
https://doi.org/10.1215/08992363-15-1-11.
McQuillar, Tayannah Lee. Rootwork: Using the Folk Magick of Black America for Love, Money, and
Success. New York: Simon & Schuster, 2003.
———. The Hoodoo Tarot: 78-Card Deck and Book for Rootworkers. Rochester, Vermont: Destiny
Books, 2020.
Miller, Chris. “How Modern Witches Enchant TikTok: Intersections of Digital, Consumer, and
Material Culture(s) on #WitchTok.” Religions 13, no. 2 (February 2022): 118.
https://doi.org/10.3390/rel13020118.
Missouri, Montré Aza. Black Magic Woman and Narrative Film: Race, Sex and Afro-Religiosity.
Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire ; New York, NY: Palgrave Macmillan, 2015.
Mitchem, Stephanie Y. African American Folk Healing. New York: New York University Press,
2007.
Moon, Dawtas of the. “Dawtas of the Moon - Black Witch, Black Witch, Hoodoo, Rootworker.”
Dawtas of the Moon. Accessed December 16, 2021. https://dawtasofthemoon.com/.
Murphy, Dana. “Black Feminist Hoodoo: Ntozake Shange’s Sassafrass, Cypress & Indigo.” CLA
Journal 62, no. 2 (2019): 178–92. https://doi.org/10.1353/caj.2019.0002.
Olupona, Jacob K. City of 201 Gods: Ilé-Ifè in Time, Space, and the Imagination. Berkeley:
University of California Press, 2011.
Omiyinka Ire. “Omii Academy.” Accessed September 30, 2021. https://www.omiiacademy.com/p/home.
Osteen, Joel. I Declare: 31 Promises to Speak over Your Life. New York: FaithWords/Hachette Book
Group, 2013.
Otero, Solimar, and Toyin Falola, eds. Yemoja: Gender, Sexuality, and Creativity in the Latina/o and
Afro-Atlantic Diasporas. Albany: SUNY Press, 2013.
Patton, Venetria K. The Grasp That Reaches Beyond the Grave: The Ancestral Call in Black
Women’s Texts. New York: State University of New York Press, 2013.
Pérez, Elizabeth. Religion in the Kitchen: Cooking, Talking, and the Making of Black Atlantic
Traditions. North American Religions. New York: New York University Press, 2016.
Quashie, Kevin Everod. Black Aliveness, or a Poetics of Being. Black Outdoors: Innovations in the
Poetics of Study. Durham: Duke University Press, 2021.
216
Raboteau, Albert J. Slave Religion: The “Invisible Institution” in the Antebellum South. Updated ed.
Oxford ; New York: Oxford University Press, 2004.
Randolph, Paschal Beverly. Eulis!: The History of Love : The Wondrous Magic, Chemistry, Rules,
Laws, Modes, Moods and Rationale; Being the Third Revelation of Soul and Sex. Also, Reply to
“Why Is Man Immortal?” The Solution of the Darwin Problem. An Entirely New Theory. S.l.:
Kessinger Publishing, 2004.
Ravilochan, Teju. “Could the Blackfoot Wisdom That Inspired Maslow Guide Us Now?” Medium
(blog), August 18, 2021. https://gatherfor.medium.com/maslow-got-it-wrong-ae45d6217a8c.
Robertson, Venetia. “Deus Ex Machina? Witchcraft and the Techno-World.” Literature & Aesthetics
19, no. 2 (2009). https://openjournals.library.sydney.edu.au/index.php/LA/article/view/5015.
Rush, Dana. Vodun in Coastal Bénin: Unfinished, Open-Ended, Global. Nashville: Vanderbilt
University Press, 2013.
Salomonsen, Jone. Enchanted Feminism: Ritual, Gender and Divinity among the Reclaiming Witches
of San Francisco. Religion and Gender. London ; New York: Routledge, 2002.
Samuel, Sigal. “The Witches of Baltimore.” The Atlantic, November 5, 2018.
https://www.theatlantic.com/international/archive/2018/11/black-millennials-african-witchcraftchristianity/574393/.
Schmidt, Sigrid. “Born in the Caul, Born in the Rain: Damara and Nama People with Extrasensory
Abilities in Namibia.” Southern African Humanities 33, no. 1 (January 1, 2020): 119–33.
Sen Elias. “Hoodoo & Witchcraft.” Crescent City Conjure. Accessed September 30, 2021.
https://crescentcityconjure.us/.
Sharpe, Christina Elizabeth. In the Wake: On Blackness and Being. Durham: Duke University Press,
2016.
Smith, Theophus Harold. Conjuring Culture: Biblical Formations of Black America. Religion in
America Series. New York: Oxford university press, 1995.
Sobel, Mechal. Trabelin’ on: The Slave Journey to an Afro-Baptist Faith. Princeton, N.J: Princeton
University Press, 1988.
Sollée, Kristen J., and Coz Conover. Witches, Sluts, Feminists: Conjuring the Sex Positive. Berkeley:
ThreeL Media, 2017.
Spade, Dean. “Mutual Aid Chart.” Accessed March 10, 2022.
http://www.deanspade.net/2019/12/04/mutual-aid-chart/.
217
Spillers, Hortense J. “Mama’s Baby, Papa’s Maybe: An American Grammar Book.” Diacritics 17, no.
2 (1987): 65–81. https://doi.org/10.2307/464747.
Starhawk. The Spiral Dance: A Rebirth of the Ancient Religion of the Great Goddess. 1st ed. San
Francisco: Harper & Row, 1979.
Stewart, Dianne M. “Black Love.” Lecture, Emory University, Spring 2019.
———. Black Women, Black Love: America’s War on African American Marriage. New York: Seal
Press, 2020.
———. Obeah, Orisa, and Religious Identity in Trinidad: Africana Nations and the Power of Black
Sacred Imagination. Volume II: Orisa. Religious Cultures of African and African Diaspora
People. Durham: Duke University Press, 2022.
———. Three Eyes for the Journey: African Dimensions of the Jamaican Religious Experience.
Oxford; New York: Oxford University Press, 2004.
Stewart, Lindsey. “Work the Root: Black Feminism, Hoodoo Love Rituals, and Practices of
Freedom.” Hypatia 32, no. 1 (2017): 103–18. https://doi.org/10.1111/hypa.12309.
Tally, Justine. “Why ‘Womanism’? The Genesis of a New Word and What It Means.” Revista de
Filología de La Universidad de La Laguna, ISSN 0212-4130, No 5, 1986, Pags. 205-222, January
1, 1986.
Taylor, Keeanga-Yamahtta, ed. How We Get Free: Black Feminism and the Combahee River
Collective. Chicago, Ill: Haymarket Books, 2017.
Teish, Luisah. Jambalaya: The Natural Woman’s Book of Personal Charms and Practical Rituals,
2021.
Thompson, Robert Farris. Flash of the Spirit: African and Afro-American Art and Philosophy. 1st
Vintage Books ed. New York: Vintage Books, 1984.
Tinsley, Omise’eke Natasha. Ezili’s Mirrors: Imagining Black Queer Genders. Durham: Duke
University Press, 2018.
“To Be Called Beloved: Womanist Ontology in Postmodern Refraction | Semantic Scholar.” Accessed
July 5, 2022. https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/To-Be-Called-Beloved-%3A-WomanistOntology-in-Townes/6e919b42dd3c4a9e23f198d936d156da3b4f3046.
Walker, Alice. In Search of Our Mothers’ Gardens: Womanist Prose. A Harvest Book. Orlando:
Harcourt, 2004.
———. You Can’t Keep a Good Woman Down. Harvest Book. Orlando: Harcourt, 2004.
Washington, Teresa N. The Architects of Existence: Àjẹ́
in Yoruba Cosmology, Ontology, and
Orature. Revised edition. Orífín, Ilé Àjẹ́
: Ọya’s Tornado, 2018.
218
Watson, Marcus. “Kongo to Kings County.” Dissertations, Theses, and Capstone Projects, June 3,
2016. https://academicworks.cuny.edu/gc_etds/1288.
Weisenfeld, Judith. New World A-Coming: Black Religion and Racial Identity during the Great
Migration. New York: New York University Press, 2016.
Wells-Oghoghomeh, Alexis S. “‘She Come Like a Nightmare’: Hags, Witches and the Gendered
Trans-Sense among the Enslaved in the Lower South.” Journal of Africana Religions 5, no. 2
(2017): 239–74.
Wellwood, John. “Human Nature, Buddha Nature On Spiritual Bypassing, Relationship, and the
Dharma.” Accessed March 2, 2022.
https://www.johnwelwood.com/articles/TRIC_interview_uncut.pdf.
Why Some Black Women Are Turning to Witchcraft, 2021.
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5qospq0cTw0.
Wilderson, Frank B. Afropessimism. First edition. New York: Liveright Publishing Corporation, a
division of W.W. Norton and Company, 2020.
Williams, Delores S. Sisters in the Wilderness: The Challenge of Womanist God-Talk. Maryknoll,
New York: Orbis Books, 2013.
Wilmore, Gayraud S. Black Religion and Black Radicalism: An Interpretation of the Religious
History of African Americans. 3rd ed., Maryknoll, N.Y: Orbis Books, 1998.
Young, Jason R. Rituals of Resistance: African Atlantic Religion in Kongo and the Lowcountry South
in the Era of Slavery. Baton Rouge: Louisiana State University Press, 2011.