
STARS ARE BORN IN DARKNESS 

Kavi Gupta presents Stars Are Born In Darkness, a solo exhibition of new paintings by New York-based mixed media artist Alisa Sikelianos-Carter, inaugural Foreland Fellow, 2020 NXTHVN Fellow, Sustainable Arts Foundation Grantee, and a 2022 Headlands Center for the Arts Artist in Residence. 


Sikelianos-Carter envisions a parallel universe in which white delusion has been eradicated and Black features are honored as a manifestation of the mystical. Her painting practice explores a speculative world in which Blackness is a superpower. Within this universe, ancient, supernatural guardians call upon Black people to activate the innate divine technology they possess in order to manifest their transmutation into consecrated, immortal beings whose Blackness is critical to their survival and essential to their celestial transcendency.


Stars Are Born In Darkness gives shape to the beginning of this narrative. It centers the true story of kidnapped Africans trafficked on ships to be enslaved in the Americas, who threw themselves, or were thrown, overboard during the middle passage.


Reimagining this historical moment of utter despair, Sikelianos-Carter employs optically dazzling materials such as glitter, mica, and abalone shell to postulate a moment of cosmic transformation. Instead of drowning in the ocean, the falling bodies of these terrified souls are called by gigantic, underwater deities to mobilize their inherent power of sacred adaptation and transform themselves into Afronauts—beings whose hair becomes a buoyant, consecrated diving apparatus that allows them to breathe and thrive in a sanctified, underwater world.


“The reason they’re able to survive is because they’re Black,” Sikelianos-Carter says. “In reality, because of white supremacy and white delusions, Black hair and Black features are seen as a detriment. But in my story, our hair is gifted from the divine to help us survive and flourish.”


The largest painting in Stars Are Born In Darkness, titled Looking Forward and Backward and Upward and Through; Black into Blue, Me Onto You (II), projects further into the story, portraying a time when the Afronauts first make contact with members of a sacred kinship called The Future Ancestors, beings who exist on land and have crowns for heads. Functioning both as protectors and as the tellers and keepers of sacred myths, The Future Ancestors safeguard a future in which the forces of anti-Blackness have been crushed.


“I started painting these works because I was very angry and afraid,” Sikelianos-Carter says. “I saw my ancestors as protectors. As a result of enslavement parts of my history have been stolen from me. I don't have images of my family past my grandmother on my altar. So when I'm honoring my ancestors I pray to both those named and unnamed. All I have is my intention and I'm activating my imagination through this work. I’m honoring those who were real, and also those I can imagine.”


Through the illuminating pictorializations of the parallel universe in which these stories are taking shape, Sikelianos-Carter is utilizing her painting practice as a healing act—a process of using storytelling as an act of empowerment and love to uplift those people who were taken from us; of reimagining historical trauma, and highlighting the strength and resilience of Blackness. 


“I think about Afro-Futurism as a place and time where we are loved and our needs are met because of our Blackness,” Sikelianos-Carter says. “What brought us here was and is awful, and in spite of that look at who we were/are/will be.”









Index Publication


Alisa Sikelianos-Carter’s solo exhibition, Stars Are Born in Darkness, unveils a speculative story of enslaved Africans thrown overboard and their journey of divine transformation in the water. Several beings appear in the work: The Afronauts, Future Ancestors, and other ancient beings of Sikelianos-Carter’s creation. Sikelianos-Carter’s work exists within an ecosystem of revisionist work by Black artists to “look at the Middle Passage as a realm of possibility and not annihilation.”1 Beyond the Middle Passage, Sikelianos-Carter shapes a world of ancient figures who reside in the unknown depths of the ocean. When our ancestors are thrown overboard, they are rescued by the ancient powers who reside there in the dirt and sand, and water. Sikelianos-Carter’s work refuses Black death and instead insists on our Aliveness,2 our protection and the potential for our vulnerabilities to save us. In this essay, I focus primarily on four large works: Meet Me on the Other Side, To Be Held, Godx of Song and Sand, and lastly, I Am Made of Sky and Mud.

As I step into the gallery, four scrolls lined with black velvet rise up the walls. Four oceanic figures, deities, larger than life welcome us. They court us with their legs and their blooming torsos, as if presenting their majesty before the room. I feel beckoned to leave my body behind and join them in their starlit air. Meet Me on the Other Side, last in line, may be the most arresting of the four. The figure appears like a rising shadow, two figures connected at the hips, one expanding torso, no legs, genderless, ghostly, god-like, an infinite black silhouette, floating and glimmering in the blue. Their fingertips almost touch as if they are a mirror. Perhaps I am the figure below, my head growing out of the Black barnacled surface, my shadow mirrored across the water’s edge. And what of the figure at the top, whose loc’d hair appears like antennae floating in space? Faceless and perhaps headless, what information could their “hair” be bringing in? What could they be perceiving and navigating through? Nowhere and everywhere.


I can’t help but return to their fingertips. Between their fin-gers exists a tension, a sense of movement or a will to touch. That tiny space holds a world of knowing, of feeling, of yearn-ings on the edge, as if they have finally re-attached, re-con-nected, become one after an eternity of loss, separation, and incomprehensible distance. Not only do stories of the Middle Passage and the slave trade come alive across this figure’s body, but also stories of migration, of separation, of loss, at and across borders, in the aftermath of enslavement, war, displacement, escape, cultural genocide. Stories that burden the body and wound the heart. They have no time or place, they are always here and now. Is this an image of our tender souls finally reconnected, riddled with the holes and marks4 of our separate journeys? In the reconnection and recollection, will our scars begin to sparkle? Will our darkest parts begin to shine? Their tenderness and their vulnera-bility feel integral to their power and strength, upwards and downwards, rooted and uprooted, severed and reattached. The infinitude of their bodies remind me that the reconnec-tion, the healing, the re-membering is also always here and now. The reconnection is inevitable. 

Each of the figure’s bodies are made of real minerals. Dirt and sand and water. Sikelianos-Carter uses black and pearl mica to create their textured, glittering surfaces. To Be Held shows a figure with two legs. Their legs are covered in small lines, undulating, curving patterns like sparkling currents up and down the legs. Their feet have dissipated into tiny coral tendrils. Each figure seems to hold the perfect tension between total stillness and constant, cellular movement. The sparkles dance like water, glass, starshine or sand as you move past each piece. For their body, where a torso might have been, there are large openings of differing sizes. The holes’ edges could be capillaries, passageways, bone, loc’d hair, coral. The holes connect at the top and rise into five sparkling Black arms, hands and fingers outstretched and reaching upwards. To Be Held is an imagined space of refuge and safety, ancestors reaching towards us to hold us, support us, and carry us through life. They represent the ancestors always at our backs, a “prayer of blue ancestor depth.”5 Sikelianos-Carter has made tangible the drastic nature of our ancestors’ adaptations, the divine technology of their Blackness that lives on within us, and the creative insurgency that transformed their feet into coral or their heads into a sea of outstretched arms. 
Two works, A Godx of Song and Sand and I Am Made of Sky and Mud, appear like sibling works. Their legs expand at the hips into a gramophonic shape. Like the horn of a gramo-phone or bell of a brass instrument, they are shaped with a sonic resonance. Are these the mythic Sirens we’ve learned about in sea tales? Is this what real-life mermaids look like—human bodies whose limbs have morphed into coral and barnacle-like appendages? What sounds do they make? What songs do they sing? I imagine them projecting wide, ambient frequencies akin to songs of whales. Sikelianos-Carter is creating a speculative world of underwater life, ancient beings whose bodies have evolved parallel to ours. Perhaps their songs move across realms of space and time to whisper to us the mysteries of the universe. The subtle Black markings across their shadowy bodies glitter and glisten. Are they scars? Adornment? Are they internal veins made visible on the outside? Are they roadways of memory?

Sikelianos-Carter is undergoing the deep work of unburying our ancestors from the bottom of the ocean, or perhaps from the far reaches of outer space. She blurs the galactic and the oceanic, bringing us into an infinite no-place and every-place where our ancestors may reside. Her practice articulates an understanding of “the meaning of life as a process shared with the dead below the river or the sea.”6 The figures hold the immutability of our own power to transform, time travel, and dip into the spirit realm for sustenance. They remind me I am a life form, a shadow standing under many shadows. My body is full of passageways and patterns that connect me to something deep, rich, and incomprehensible. This is what it’s like to have a body imbibed with memory. They allow me to move beyond the violence and dehumanization we experience on this Earth, and ask what other stories do our “nerves and [our] skin remember”?7 

Looking Forward and Backward and Upward and Through; Black into Blue, Me onto You is perfectly titled. The work is multilayered, multi-directional, rhyming, rhythmic, and relational at its core. The largest work in the exhibition, its bright colors and movement ring through the whole of the space. This work depicts a Future Ancestor on the left and an Afronaut on the right. They interlock arms, holding hands in the shape of infinity. The Future Ancestor has traveled back in time to meet the Afronaut who has now undergone their full transformation. Both fully formed, we witness them in a moment of bright connection and transference. The past and future collide as they interlock hands into a moment of bursting energies. Light, oceanic and galactic forms zoom around them. The Future Ancestor with its head made of braids and adorned scalps appears how we may imagine an alien to look. This work represents the importance of hair as a divine technology of Blackness in Sikelianos-Carter’s practice. Hair is significant to each figure and its purpose in this ancient universe.

There’s a Wave in Every Cell depicts a view from underwater. The belly of a ship cuts the blue sky and curls down into the sea. The figures plummet towards the ocean floor, in-transformation, in-flight. Almost Afronauts. They have jumped overboard to escape enslavement, or they were thrown off by the ship’s crew. An abundant world awaits them comprised of salt, water and shimmering Blackness. Although this work is not made in relation to or in reaction to European maritime painting, it represents an important opportunity to complicate narratives of slavery in the art historical canon. Sikelianos-Carter gifts us an alternate speculative reality to J. M. W. Turner’s The Slave Ship or Homer’s The Gulf Stream. The view from underwater that Sikelianos-Carter has crafted awakens the possibility of life beyond death. The red “death” pictured in Turner’s painting centers the impossibility of Black life, whereas Sikelianos-Carter is making a claim for Black Aliveness (as theorized by scholar Kevin Everod Quashie). Once we have broken beneath the surface, we are transported into a blue portal brimming with ancient processes of alchemic abundance. The sliver of ship glistens with spells that have been adhered to the bottom of the boat like barnacles, patterns for their use. Their Blackness was always their protection. The initial act of escape or violent discard that exists off the page becomes an opening for their bodies to refuse “death.” They become the vessels for Life and Aliveness that are inherent to their Blackness.

Hands of Fortuna (Sea Asteroid of Fate) references Fortuna, the Roman goddess of fortune and fate. She is the one who spins the wheel of fortune. This wheel of fortune shows five concentric circles, made of blue and black, sparkling coral, hands, and oceanic tendrils. This piece speaks to the horrifying circumstances of displacement and violence our ancestors endured through colonialism, the Middle Passage, and violent enslavement. We have no explanations for why history has unfolded the way it has, and have no choice in being birthed into this reality. We are here, everlasting and glowing. We have accepted this fate for what it is, yet our Blackness has been our medicine. The wheels continue to turn, our ancestors’ wisdom encircling us and churning us forward through time.

In A Blessing, The Sound of Absolute Freedom, A Choreography of Choices, An Order of Light, and Wild Delight, we are witnessing various moments of activation, symphonies of ancient processes. These pieces depict whimsical vortexes, openings for time travel, or portals where time and space do not exist. The now-Afronauts float and tumble through an environment that shimmers with life and color. The Black seascape from There’s a Wave
in Every Cell is echoed here, but bustles with bright and luminescent forms once we get a closer view. This work represents a moment of relief, of transformative potential, and magic from the first break from the ship. The processes of luminescent life have transformed their shackles into silver disks made of iridescent abalone shells. Like abalone mollusks, which can repair their own shells, they are tapped into ancient patterns of self-repair and transcendent freedom. Both the silver that spins around their ankles and their blooming afros assist them in navigating the journey. 

Part of a series of four, the deity of To Be Held represents an ancestral urge to reach for and protect us, their descendants, across realms. Their legs are covered in undulating currents and patterns, sparkling with mica. The two legs dissipate downwards into feet of tiny coral tendrils. Where a torso would be, there are eight openings of various sizes. The space of their torso/hips appear as Black coral, locs, bone, capillaries or river routes. These openings enclose at the top and rise up into five arms, open palms and fingers outstretched. Like ancestors at our back, they are ready to carry us, support us and lift us through our journeys.

A Godx of Song and Sand has a sonic quality to its form. Two human legs break at the hips and outstretch into an undulating coral form that appears to ebb and flow in the water. The coral form stretches outwards past the edges of the frame. The figure inherently takes up space and exists beyond the bounds of our comprehension. Sikelianos-Carter described their tendrils floating through space underwater, similar to the tendrils of a jellyfish. A soft membrane. This figure may have the ability to change its form and tactility, from soft and tender to stoney and strong.

Similar to A Godx of Song and Sand, I am Made of Sky and Mud shows two legs standing confidently. Their legs expand upwards into an enclosed, ocean-like rock form. Is the figure soft or hard, sponge or stone? Their legs are covered in sparkling currents, which move upwards into a blooming gramophone shape. Covered in many Black spots, like holes, they feel like openings to emit sound, messages, and frequencies. The many Black holes could be portals, seeing-eyes into another realm or space, or portals to transport through.
Meet Me on the Other Side references twins and mirrors. The fourth deity of the pantheon is doubled and infinite. Four hands, their fingertips almost touching, create moments
of tension and longing. Are these figures headless, or have their heads morphed into hair-like antennae? The top figure is marked with many black holes, lined with sparkling edges. The bottom figure’s head appears to grow out of the ocean's surface, their body covered in coral-like currents and patterns. There is a tenderness, softness, and yearning in this work that exists across their connected torsos and between their outstretched hands. Perhaps they are performing a ritual or spell across their almost-touching hands. It appears as if they are willing something significant into existence. Their tenderness and sense of protection make them feel even more powerful. Their body is like a shadowy silhouette, mirroring the under-sides of two worlds, intimately and intrinsically connected.  

A Cascade is defined as “a process whereby something, typically information or knowledge, is successively passed on,” and as a verb, it is to “(of water) pour downward rapidly and in large quantities.” These dual meanings take hold in The Greater the People the Wider the Cascade, where an assembly of ancient beings come to form. Standing or floating in an infinite blue space, seven figures exist in a cascade of shimmering Blackness. Half human, half God, their bodies have evolved over time towards an ancient purpose. Where our torsos would be, their bodies open upwards into a kinetic web. The shape of each individual body is reminiscent of the gramophone. A quality of sonic projection comes alive in their shape, and when connected, begets a sense of collective language, tone, and frequency. Together, they echo. They are keepers of a kinetic stillness, a place for cosmic secrets to be held safely for future travelers. The pattern of their formation blurs the bounds between micro and macro geographies: From outer space or underwater galaxies to the coils growing from a Black person’s scalp. They are a root system, from our hair to the underground root systems of trees and mycelium. The complexities of their aliveness and sonic language are kept internal, opaque to outsiders who may only catch glimpses of light shimmering off the surface of their Blackness.

Mind of My Mind depicts a different view of the same figure from Meet Me on the Other Side. This time, the figure has revealed their full length to us. Their torso is long and full, resembling a snake, fully decorated in intricate patterns of glitter and mica. They rest in the tendrils of the seagrass, illuminated by the sparkling blue waters. This figure represents a significant deity figure who occupies two different worlds. The title references Octavia Butler’s 1977 novel of the same name. Central themes in the work include telepathy, emotional connection, and ancient mystical powers that connect African ancestors with their diasporic descendants. Their hair exists as a technology, antennae, to connect and transmit information. Perhaps they are twins, siblings, or dual sides of the same being

Africosmos of Sun and Sea and Africosmos of Moon and Sea sparkle and glitter with magnificence as you move before them. Their sparkles are iridescent, shifting in colors from each side, creating a complex experience of light and color. Sikelianos-Carter has melded patterns of repeating braids and traditionally Black hairstyles into a form of sacred geometry. You may see similar structures like these for the heads of her Future Ancestors depicted in other works/series. In many African diasporic cultures, the head has spiritual significance as a sight of connection to ancestors and higher power. The hair itself becomes a crown, antenna to the spirit world, as well as a site for rituals of beauty, care, and protection. As African traditions of braiding moved across the Middle Passage, they were used to stow away seeds, to share escape routes like a map, and more. Braids and knowledge of braiding wield significant and enduring power for survival and sustenance. Braids are technology in themselves. “Cornrows” in the US and “cane rows” in the Caribbean, even their names remain tied to spaces of labor, economy, agri-culture, and food systems. Sikelianos-Carter has imbibed these multiplicitous meanings into an abstract and sacred form floating in space. Almost kaleidoscopic, they hold many meanings that continue to unfold across space and time.

THERE'S A WAVE IN EVERY CELL
There’s a Wave in Every Cell depicts a view from underwater. The belly of a ship cuts the blue sky and curls down into the sea. The figures plummet towards the ocean floor, in-transformation, in-flight. Almost Afronauts. They have jumped overboard to escape enslavement, or they were thrown off by the ships crew. An abundant world awaits them comprised of salt, water and shimmering Blackness. Although this work is not made in relation or reaction to European maritime painting, it represents an important opportunity to complicate narratives of slavery in the art historical canon. Sikelianos-Carter gifts us an alternate speculative reality to J. M. W. Turner’s The Slave Ship or Homer’s The Gulf Stream. The view from underwater that Sikelianos-Carter has crafted awakens the possibility for life-beyond-death. The red “death” pictured in Turner’s painting centers the impossibility of Black life, whereas Sikelianos-Carter is making a claim for Black Aliveness (as theorized by scholar,bKevin Everod Quashie). Once we have broken beneath the surface, we are transported into a blue portal brimming with ancient processes of alchemic abundance. The sliver of ship glistens with spells that have been adhered to the bottom of the boat like barnacles, patterns for their use. Their Blackness was always their protection. The initial act of escape or violent discard that exists off the page becomes an opening for their bodies to refuse “death.” They become the vessels for Life and Aliveness that are inherent to their Blackness.

WILD DELIGHT
In Wild Delight, we are witnessing a moment of activation, a symphony of ancient process. This piece feels like a whimsical vortex, an opening for time travel, or a portal where time and space do not exist. In a turn from the previous piece, the now-Afronauts float and tumble through an environment that shimmers with life and color. The Black seascape from There’s a Wave in Every Cell is echoed here, but bustles with bright and luminescent forms once we get a closer view. This work represents a moment of relief, of transformative potential and magic from the first break from the ship. The processes of the luminescent life have transformed their shackles into silver disks made of iridescent abalone shells. Like abalone mollusks who can repair their own shells, they are tapped into ancient patterns of self-repair and transcendent freedom. Both the silver that spins around their ankles and their blooming afros assist them in navigating through the journey.

THE GREATER THE PEOPLE THE WIDER THE CASCADE

 Cascade is defined as “a process whereby something, typically information or knowledge, is successively passed on,” and as a verb is to, “(of water) pour downward rapidly and in large quantities.” These dual meanings take hold in this work where an assembly of ancient beings come to form. Standing or floating in an infinite blue space, seven figures exist in a cascade of shimmering Blackness. Half human, half God, their bodies have evolved overtime towards an ancient purpose. Where our torsos would be, their bodies open upwards into a kinetic web. The shape of each individual body is reminiscent of the gramophone. A quality of sonic projection comes alive in their shape, and when connected, begets a sense of collective language, tone and frequency. Together, they echo. They are keepers of a kinetic stillness, a place for cosmic secrets to be held safely for future travelers. The pattern of their formation blurs the bounds between micro and macro geographies: From outer space or underwater galaxies, to the coils growing from a Black person’s scalp. They are a root system, from our hair to the underground root systems of trees and mycelium. The complexities of their aliveness and sonic language are kept internal, opaque to outsiders who may only catch glimpses of light shimmering off the surface of their Blackness.