My thesis exhibition, A Sea Change, gives name to a gut-wrenching, inside-out time in my life that began in 2021, but has been aggressively punctuated by the past year’s events. The overarching theme has been loss and love. The threat or actual loss of my closest family, both my family of origin and the family I’ve created, and the criticality of holding onto love no matter what. Walking on the razor's edge of tragedy; enduring the incessant shock of an unraveling connection; experiencing the catastrophic possibility of self-undoing. Each experience has brought me closer and closer to the God in all things. And by God, I mean Spirit. And by Spirit, I mean Everything. The Everything in Everything
The installations, drawings, prints, and paintings in my exhibition are arranged chronologically, starting with, and marking my time, like Persephone, in the underworld. What follows is the expression and transmutation, healing, reclaiming, and honoring of my connection to my mother, myself, and the other side. 



We’re All Here encompasses the shock and turmoil in the early stages of grief—the utter experience of being consumed by a feeling. Braid collagraph waves crash beneath a giant, crying, angry monster. The many eye contours (my eyes, my mother’s eyes, and my daughter’s eyes, all from varying ages) represent the different versions of myself (that have survived throughout), along with symbolizing guidance and protection from my mother, my ancestors, and other guides and guardians witnessing this process. I’m depicting the practice of riding out deep feelings of pain, letting them wash over me, and accepting these urges as they come. Eyes can symbolize protection, guidance, and wisdom. In including the eyes of my closest family members, I see them as reminders of “seeing” my way through my darkest moments. At the center of the piece, a smaller, devastated, wailing face is being swallowed whole, choking on its own green glowing heart. These seemingly similar but contrasting beings represent the spectrum of loss. 


Monstrous Grief is an embodiment of the enormous and unwieldy nature of loss. A tangled, unmoored beast covered in a deep, velvety black with hints of light signaling possibility (of hope, guidance, the divine) within the darkness. The low-contrast surface and luminous shapes require the viewer to look closely. Engaging intimately reveals wayward marks that can be read like a map, indicating the many directions these feelings can take us while also displaying the complex internal workings of this being. Acknowledging (through looking and feeling) the deeply wounded parts of ourselves allows for transformation and a path forward. This beast is an offering (of expansiveness and care) to my own feelings and, with its scale, posture, and breaking openness, a representation of grieving.

Wounds are, by definition, sites of healing. In this process of contending with my grief and the inevitable places I've been forced to revisit in my head and heart, an opportunity has emerged. I have permitted myself to tend to these "lesser" parts and ultimately make space for them to grow into something more powerful and whole. A Sea Change is the psychic landscape where this process takes place. The center of the piece is a site where a moment of transmutation has occurred. Transmutation is the "action of changing or the state of being changed into another form." The thick scarring around the entry point and the scattered teeth across the surface show evidence of this action. Transforming from wound to portal, this is a graveyard or compost heap where a rebirth has taken place. I cast my 12-year-old teeth in acrylic from a mold I found at my mother's house, one of the hundreds of objects she kept from my childhood. Teeth can symbolize our development, archive, power, and protection. I included my teeth as a symbolic act of letting go, shedding old ways, and in that embracing new, less reactive ways of responding.


P O W E R  M O V E S speaks to self-possession after a heartbreaking experience. I hand-formed these power cells, “drawing” with various sizes of my synthetic knotless braids onto a substrate. Braids are a personal and broader cultural symbol of power, connection to spirit/ancestors, pride, and care. Through intuitive research, I have come to conceptualize my power as a coiled, copper-colored braid nucleus gently floating in my solar plexus, preparing to stretch into its final form. Collagraphs are inherently tactile and automatically offer impressions of the object into the paper; here, a part of my body has left a mark. The grid composition indicates time and provides a way to read the work (left to right, top to bottom), tracking the transformation. Chromatically, this piece differs from the other offerings in my thesis. The earth tones ground me in the purpose of these forms and reflect my body and resilience back to me.



Death of A Pisces Star is a memorial to my mother and my imagination's rendering of the moment our spirit passes from this world to the next. Additionally, this work speaks to the notion of our cosmic origins, beings composed of stardust and light, returning to that upon our deaths. The past year has left me fixated on the event of leaving this realm. What could it look and feel like at the moment of transition? I imagine our energy releasing like tiny soul asteroids into an elsewhere place, multiplying, collapsing, bursting, mirroring, and spiraling into an unknown portal. My mother's silhouette creates the container for this concept. I constructed star-like configurations by linking her image together, referencing circular forms such as clocks, wheels, and planetary bodies. These shapes are scattered across a galactic, shimmery blue surface. She spins out of a confluence of her fractaled form, where her luminous center constructs a quilt-like star; a converging of her many selves, her nucleus. My choice of materials, pieces of light (glitter, glass, crystals), and chromatic interference layers lends itself to my envisioning of this spirit space.



  In Treasure, I’ve utilized the same visual language as Death of a Pisces Star, but instead focus on a single contour or a more defined composition of my mother's figure in the star forms as they relate to each other. Atmospheric figures, some painted metallic oranges and golds, others left more translucent, have all been adorned with glass, abalone shell, mica, and crystals specifically charged in her full moon. These elemental materials serve as an offering of energy to her spirit. The paintings in this series are each an altar, creating a landing place for my mother's spirit to rest. 

This star print focuses on my mother’s braid, which I received posthumously, and then photographed outside. The constellational form was achieved by digitally collaging the images and changing the scale and direction of her hair (much like the different twists and turns our paths take to create a lifetime). Braids have been a core element in my work since the birth of my practice. Symbolizing community, power, connection, and so much more. As an adolescent, I’d cut and dye my mom’s hair. While the context has changed, the ritual of caring for her: holding, cutting, and dying her hair/holding, cutting, and adorning her image feels equally devotional. Having my mother’s braid, a part of her that is so recognizable and enduring, is a gift. For many of us, hair is the keeper of our time. It’s present when we’re born, the start of our form, and changes color and texture as we age, often remaining even after we leave the physical world. Engaging with this never-ending part of her, as it interlocks and folds into itself, is like viewing a star; I can see her even after she’s gone.

